the title of this post is arguing by
definition so now we're getting into
deep rationality because we're getting
into the foundations of logic what does
deductive logic even mean how is it
useful in logic class they teach you
that cisms are the foundation of logic
but I believe based on my reading that
syllogisms are highly overrated so let's
dive into the most famous syllogism of
them all the syllogism says all men are
mortal Socrates is a man therefore
Socrates is
Mortal it sounds like a profound Insight
that we were able to just deductively
conclude that Socrates is Mortal because
we knew that all men are mortal and he's
a man but realistically imagine that you
suspect that Socrates is Immortal
because you see him like getting heard
and like instantly regenerating or
whatever you're just getting Immortal
vibes from Socrates and you tell your
friend hey I'm not sure Socrates is
moral and your friend is like well you
think he's a man don't you and you're
like I mean I think that he can like
serve in government and I think that he
can uh you know reproduce I think he has
some manly qualities I think he has
facial hair and the friend is like okay
then by definition it's all done you
know and you're like well wait a minute
if it has to be by definition then maybe
he's not a man because it seems like
you're just using a weird definition of
a man where you're you're insisting on
combining the facial hair with the
immortality but I only buy into the
facial hair and I'm not super were
convinced that he's Immortal and the
other person is like it's a definition
man and now I'm like okay now I think
that your choice of terminology is
adversarial to me you you just don't
want to let me have my claim that
Socrates is Immortal and you're trying
to shoehorn mortality into a definition
of a word that also means things like
facial hair right and that's actually
not the way that productive reasoning
works the syllogism is actually adding
no value the only time that it's
actually con ing to conclude that
Socrates is Mortal is if you already
believe that he was Mortal when you went
along with the premise that he's a man
right the syllogism is adding no other
value it's only convincing to people who
thought that he was Mortal in the first
place if you come into this sism
suspecting that Socrates is actually
Immortal and then you read all men are
Socrates is Mortal it tells you nothing
because to the degree that you suspect
he's Immortal you already suspect that
he's not a quote unquote Man by this
pathological definition so I hope that
you are now becoming suspicious of the
value of syllogisms as as I've become
now I don't want to completely throw the
baby out with the bath water I think
there is something profound about
syllogisms which is that they are an
early instance of syntactic logic right
form versus function formal logic not
just semantics meaning logic where if it
just has a certain structure right if
the word follow a certain pattern if the
symbols are able to be processed a
certain mechanical way then there's
value in just kind of turning the dial
turning the gears right and seeing what
comes out uh where if you start with
something true and you turn those gears
those formal gears those symbolic gears
you get to an output which is still
valid right you're doing a truth
preserving transformation so a syllogism
is like a trivial case of a truth
preserving transformation and if you go
on to study first order logic or even
just algeb like high school algebra
right that is a study of mathematical
truth preserving Transformations like
when you go solve an equation in algebra
right you're doing symbolic logic and
every line deductively follows from the
previous line and this Socrates is a man
syllogism this is kind of a trivial case
one of the earliest cases of that kind
of symbolic logic so I agree that
symbolic logic is valuable but I think
syllogisms as a way to do philosophy and
reach accurate conclusions about who's
mortal syllogisms are highly overrated
now am I attacking a straw man do people
actually use syllogisms to try to get
you to believe things about AI well I
give you the case of Professor Lee
Cronin on Twitter he tweeted on October
8 2022 quote algorithms cannot be
creative by
definition the human brain can be
creative therefore the human brain is
not just
algorithmic okay that is literally a
syllogism so we have an AI researcher
who thinks that you can shed light on
the limits of computational creativity
with a
syllogism it it just doesn't work like
that because we can use the same push
back that we use the Socrates I can say
Okay Professor Cronin um what if I
believe that the human brain I strongly
suspect that the human brain is
algorithmic right that everything that
we do is abstracted away as a comput or
as a symbolic manipulation and it's
substrate independent right what if I
strongly suspect that what does your
syllogism tell me Well the syllogism
asserts algorithms cannot be creative by
definition so the syllogism doesn't let
me use the term algorithm if I suspect
that the human brain is in fact creative
so now I kind of need to go and invent
another term where it can describe
software and it can also describe the
human brain doing creativity because I
believe such a term is needed to
describe what the human brain is so
Professor Cronin is basically trying to
Edge us out of using the term algorithm
because he wants to enforce this
definition of algorithm to kind of seize
the win to kind of seize the win by
definition to say you're not allowed to
call the human brain algorithmic if the
human brain is creative and I'm like
well wait a minute wait a minute can't
we just say that it is algorithmic and
it's creative and maybe algorithms can
be creative and your definition is just
not the best definition so you you can
argue who has the right to it doesn't
really matter in the end but the point
is that Professor Cronin is not actually
making an argument right there there's
nothing in what he's saying that is a
convincing piece of
justification he's purely doing the move
of the syllogism he's purely saying hey
if you already agree with me to begin
with then I haven't lost any truth right
if you already agree that Socrates is a
man and that all men are mortal okay
then Socrates is Mortal but that says
nothing to people who don't already
agree with them it's not an argument
it's not a justification at all okay so
it's it's crazy that you know the reason
why less wrong exists and teaches your
rationality is because you have working
professors in important Fields who are
messing up their logic all right
now let's turn the table again when can
definitions add value we talked about
the value of just having formal logic in
fields like algebra and first order
logic and proving things and a syllogism
is a trivial case of that but there's
actually another place where definitions
add value which is when they help you
make arguments by Logic so there is such
a thing as a logical argument and the
definition in The Logical argument isn't
doing the work of the argument saying by
definition doesn't convince anybody but
it's a starting point when you have a
longer argument and the argument is
helping you explain something in a
parsimonious way in the simplest
possible way because when you're doing
science you're not just aiming to
explain a phenomenon you're aiming to
explain it in the most elegant possible
way you're aiming to compress the
phenomenon given a short description
right so if if I know Newtonian physics
I can look at a lot of different planets
moving around motion that seems like it
might take me a lot of bits of
information to describe and I can
actually describe it in much fewer bits
of information because I have a compact
model right I have a a theory with
explanatory power that is a formal
definition of what explanatory power is
it lets you compress a description of
what you're seeing and you get a better
compression if you're using better
Concepts which have better definitions
so that's where the value of of
definition potentially does come in not
because I can have a syllogism and I can
argue by definition that's not valuable
but it is valuable when I'm like let me
teach you a term called optimization
power I have a definition of this term
called optimization power which we
talked about in a different post uh
which is you can measure how well an
agent is hitting narrow Targets in the
future this is just a term that alaz are
made up right but the reason why the
term is useful is not because he then to
go argue by definition but it's because
it gives you a compressed understanding
of what's going on and what to expect it
gives you a compressed understanding of
why in general humans can out engineer a
natural selection it gives you a compact
reason to suspect that a jet engine
actually has a higher thrust to weight
ratio than a bird because you know that
the engineer who made the jet engine is
a higher optimization power than the
natural selection process that made the
bird it has predictive power it has the
the power to compress your Insight about
the universe like how would I possibly
know that a jet engine has a higher
thrust to weight ratio than a bird where
would I get that obscure piece of
knowledge well the answer is I derived
it from my compact mental model because
I understand the power of this concept
of optimization power it's a quality
choice of definition that compress my
understanding of the universe and
similarly I can accurately predict that
a solar panel is going to have higher
Energy Efficiency at harnessing the
sun's energy than a leaf because the
Bela is number one engineered by a
process dumber than Humanity it was
engineered by natural selection and the
solar panel was engineered by a brain
and also because the leaf has to worry
about you know being a cell and using
proteins and keeping the plant alive and
the human engineer just doesn't have
those constraints so if I compare two
engineering problems and I compare the
two Engineers the two optimizers then I
have an easy way to arrive at a correct
prediction of which one is going to have
better efficiency properties and it is
indeed the solar panel last I checked
solar panels today have about 10 times
the power efficiency of leaves
apparently the main reason is just
because they're able to use more of the
full spectrum of the sunlight but why
doesn't the leaf use the full spectrum
like there's no really good excuse It's
just under a lot of constraints and its
designer is not as smart as we are okay
A little bit of a digression but I just
wanted to point out what it's like when
you have a definition that helps you
compress information that's the proper
use of definitions right words give you
compact mental models which is the
objective of science the whole project
of science is to compress observations
by having mental models with the highest
possible explanatory power so that is a
successful use of science to Output
these good definitions that are
incorporated into these useful theories
but it's not to argue syllogisms by
definition if that's all you're doing
then you're not doing science you're
just doing something useless that sounds
smart because you know Socrates the
Greeks it's part of a tradition of logic
that yielded a bunch of smart things but
it itself is not smart it is fake so
that's the post arguing by definition
and then just as a heris rule whenever
you notice somebody in the real world
trying to argue a point and saying by
definition they almost always would be
better served not saying by definition
just trying to rethink what they're
actually saying just kill those words by
definition and just be very precise
about what you're actually saying all
right if you have requests for other
less wrong posts that you want me to
Riff on just hit me up on Twitter