what is the single most serious threat
to the National Security of the United
States nuclear
proliferation nuclear
proliferation welcome to Dune
debates I talk a lot on this podcast
about how artificial general
intelligence is about to become a weapon
of mass destruction and if the knowledge
of how to build AI ever gets out of into
the public then I think humanity is
doomed I think we're going to go extinct
that's not what I'm talking about today
though today I'm talking about a claim
that's more blindingly obvious I'm
talking about the risk of human
extinction from nuclear weapons
proliferation that's something that
really nobody should doubt right enter
Ben Horwitz the co-founder and managing
partner of the well-known Venture
Capital firm andreon Horowitz otherwise
known as a16z
Ben was recently interviewed on a
podcast and he said something about
nuclear proliferation that shocked me we
haven't had any nuclear activity and and
there's a very very specific reason for
that because everybody's got nukes and
nobody wants to get nuked well it's true
that nobody wants to get nuked so you
might be thinking hey Ben's just
explaining the principle of mutually
assured destruction everybody knows that
if you're the first to launch a nuke
then you're starting a nuclear war and
the other side's going to Nuke you and
you can't win a nuclear war therefore
nobody's ever going to start a nuclear
war which makes nuclear proliferation
good makes sense right this is where Ben
misses the point sure the threat of
mutually assured destruction provides us
some safety through deterrence the
problem is when people like Ben take
that way too far overestimate the amount
of safety through deterrence and go all
the way to the point of arguing that
nuclear proliferation makes us safe
because the truth is that safety doesn't
come from nuclear proliferation it comes
from nuclear
nonproliferation I'll explain more in a
minute but first let me give you some
context around that short clip you heard
from Ben Horowitz Ben's Venture Capital
firm and dreon Horowitz supports open
source development of cuttingedge AI
models like meta's llama models so when
Ben makes the case for the benefits of
nuclear weapons
proliferation the context is that he
wants to argue for the benefits of open-
sourcing the latest models even as they
get close to AGI Ben is saying let's
heed the lesson that we've learned from
the first few Decades of the nuclear age
and in Ben's mind that lesson is anytime
you're making government policy for who
should be allowed to have a dangerous
new technology the best policy is no
policy just let it rip here's the full
clip so you can see exactly how Ben
connects the goodness of nuclear weapons
proliferation with the goodness of Open
Source AI The Regulators are now moving
in and uh you know very ironically oddly
bizarrely talking about uh trying to ban
open source which is probably the safest
thing that could possibly happen in AI
like I often remind people like the last
nuclear bomb that was launched was when
only we had the
nukes like that that's a dangerous world
with one person having the nukes and now
everyone has nukes and or a bunch of
people have nukes and we haven't had we
that cuz everybody's got nukes nobody to
get nuked and I think that AI is you
know to the extent that AI is a super
weapon um that will also be true there
and so if you believe that then I think
what you want is open source notice Ben
isn't bringing up the claim that AI
isn't a super weapon and that's why we
don't have to regulate it no what he's
saying is if you believe AI is a super
weapon then you should want it to
proliferate that's the explicit argument
he's making let's review his logic again
at the end of World War II only the US
had a nuclear weapon and Japan got nuked
during the Cold War and postwar era more
countries had nuclear weapons and none
of the countries got nuked therefore
1945 when only the US had nukes was the
least safe time and today now that nine
countries have nukes this is a more safe
time and in the future if 100 countries
get nukes that would be an even safer
time right right Ben I wonder if Ben has
ever seen Roger sc's famous lecture
about this kind of geopolitical
equilibrium I mean it was all over Tik
Tok let's say in this case I want to
find out at a level of seven see as you
can see the more you around the
more you're going to find out I find
Roger sk's framework helpful because I
think it's accurate to see nuclear
weapons proliferation as a kind of
around but but Ben apparently
has a different framework he thinks that
if we allow more nuclear proliferation
then we're going to get more nuclear
safety if you're lazy fair about nuclear
proliferation you're not going to find
out anything no you're going to be safer
the situation is going to be more stable
before I explain all the obvious reasons
why nuclear proliferation is bad
actually let's take a look at what our
own government is always trying to tell
us about this
situation in this clip from the 2004
presidential debate between John KY and
George W bush it's striking to hear how
important of an issue nuclear
nonproliferation is to them no question
two minutes Senator Cary if you are
elected president what will you take to
that office thinking is the single most
serious threat to the National Security
of the United States nuclear
proliferation nuclear prol eration 90
seconds Mr pres actually we've increased
uh funding for
um for um dealing with nuclear
proliferation about 35% since I've been
the president I agree with my opponent
that the biggest threat facing this
country is weapons of mass destruction
in the hands of a terrorist
Network and that's why we've put
proliferation as
the one of the centerpieces of a
multi-prong strategy to make the country
safer
my Administration started What's called
the proliferation security initiative
over 60 Nations involved with
disrupting
um the trans shipment of information
Andor uh Weapons of Mass construction
materials here's President Obama on his
2009 diplomatic visit to Prague again
talking about the importance of nuclear
nonproliferation today the Cold War has
disappeared
but thousands of those weapons have
not in a strange turn of History the
threat of global nuclear war has gone
down but the risk of a nuclear attack
has gone
up more Nations have acquired these
weapons testing has continued Black
Market trade in nuclear secrets and
nuclear materials
abound the technology to build a bomb
has spread terrorists are determined to
buy build or steal one our efforts to
contain these dangers are centered on a
global nonproliferation regime but as
more people and Nations Break The Rules
we could reach the point where the
center cannot hold finally we're going
to see John krey again this time in 2015
when he was Obama's Secretary of State
speaking at the international nuclear
nonproliferation treaty review
conference the nuclear nonproliferation
treaty or npt is the landmark 1968
International agreement aimed at
preventing the spread of nuclear weapons
moving toward nuclear disarmament and
facilitating the peaceful use of nuclear
energy it has 191 signatories which is
literally every country in the world as
a signatory except India Pakistan Israel
and North Korea North Korea did
originally sign it but they pulled out
of the treaty in 2003 to pursue their
own nuclear weapons program I should
mention the toal toal number of nuclear
states in the world right now is nine we
have five nuclear nonproliferation
treaty signatories the United States
China Russia United Kingdom and France
and then we have four non- signatories
that I mentioned uh India Pakistan
Israel and North Korea now notice when
John kery is speaking at that 2015
nuclear nonproliferation treaty review
conference not only is he talking about
nuclear non-proliferation he's also
talking about Humanity's shared goal as
represented in the treaty the shared
goal of disarming our existing nuclear
weapons and rolling back the clock on
the nuclear proliferation that's already
happened can we really create a future
in which nuclear weapons exist only
within the pages of history
books the answer is yes for the past 45
years The Guiding Light on these issues
has been the nuclear nonproliferation
trip
it's a pretty straightforward
Arrangement nothing
complicated countries without nuclear
weapons will not obtain
them countries with nuclear weapons will
move towards
disarmament and all countries will have
access to Peaceful nuclear
energy and for this treaty to remain
upright we need to ensure its words have
weight that its rules are binding and
that its parties are
compliant and that means that the world
has to remain United in rejecting the
proliferation of nuclear weapons
anywhere so those are our highest
ranking leaders trying to explain again
and again how important nuclear
nonproliferation is but for whoever
needs to hear it I will now explain the
logic of why nuclear proliferation is
bad we can break it down into three main
reasons escalation spirals
Rogue actors and accidents we're all
familiar with escalation spirals you get
into a back and forth where everybody
takes a turn doing a little attack at
the other side and then the other side
feels like they need to do something to
restore DET turrets as we speak this is
happening with Israel and Iran they keep
attacking each other and the attacks
grow larger and larger and neither side
feels like it wants to back down they
both feel like they're getting backed
into a corner we can also look at the
war in Ukraine where some of the attacks
are now hitting the Russian Homeland
where their Doctrine is that they're
allowed to defend their Homeland using
their nuclear weapons if you back Russia
into a corner and they feel like their
Conventional Weapons aren't doing enough
it's going to be tempting to bust out
the nukes not necessarily those big 50
Megaton strategic nukes just tactical
nukes you know a smooth on-ramp from a
large conventional bomb to a small
Battlefield nuke just you know blow open
a bunker no big deal now you might think
come on they know to escalate with
conven weapons they're not going to
cross the line they're not going to
violate the nuclear taboo fine but even
if you just make sure to always escalate
with Conventional Weapons what happens
is you end up striking the other side's
nuclear installations and the other side
feels that that necessitates a defensive
nuclear response in the Cuban Missile
Crisis the United States authorized a
number of purely conventional
escalations against the Soviet Union
which still almost led to an allout
nuclear war what happened was that the
US imposed a naval blockade around Cuba
to prevent the Soviet Union from
delivering more nuclear missiles to the
island but anytime there was a naval
confrontation that created the potential
for escalation to nuclear war I'm not
just talking about a theoretical
possibility here have you ever heard of
the b59 submarine incident the b-59 was
a Soviet submarine operating near Cuba
at the time of peak tensions between the
US and the Soviet Union and it was
carrying a nuclear tipped torpedo well
the US Navy was there just enforcing it
blockade around Cuba and at one point it
wanted to signal to the b59 that it
needed to surface so it just did the
standard practice of dropping what are
called practice depth charges into the
water around the submarine charges that
aren't big enough to harm it but just
tell it that it needs to come surface
but the crew of the submarine was cut
off from Communications with Moscow they
figured they're probably under attack
and War had probably already broken out
given the PE tensions the captain of the
submarine wanted to launch the nuclear
Torpedoes for fortunately the second in
command a guy named vasil aripov
persuaded him not to he may have saved
the world that day in 1962 the torpedo
he ultimately decided not to fire was
equivalent in yield to the Hiroshima
bomb it would have killed thousands of
US Sailors and likely sparked a
fullscale nuclear exchange between the
United States and the Soviet Union keep
in mind that both of these nations had
War plans explicitly drawn out to fire
hundreds or thousands of their nuclear
missiles at a time in the case of
breakout of nuclear war because in
nuclear war you only get one chance for
your main attack it's use them or lose
them and so they both have policies
written out saying well we're going to
use them that's mutually assured
destruction after all it only works when
we go and Destroy Everything the Cuban
Missile Crisis in the middle of the Cold
War is probably the single biggest
escalation spiral that we just managed
to walk back but like I said we are
holding our breath today because
escalation spirals are happening as we
speak Israel is a nuclear Nation Iran's
nuclear program is reportedly only weeks
away from having nuclear weapons
capabilities Putin is explicitly
threatening to use nukes to defend the
Russian Homeland and reportedly the
United States government at various
times thought that he had an extremely
high probability of using tactical nukes
against Ukraine none of this is
theoretical nuclear proliferation is not
a solved problem that we can look at in
the rear view mirror and breathe sigh of
relief no it's a nightmare that we're
living day after day and just a contrast
in a scenario like 1945 when only the
United States had nukes not to mention
before 1945 when nobody had nukes if
we're just comparing to
1945 it is a more stable equilibrium
when a single actor has nukes because
you don't risk an escalation spiral yes
there's the question of what decisions
will the one government make but it's
easier to imagine an equilibrium where
one government makes good decisions
rather than trying to imagine an
equilibrium where nine countries or
potentially 90 countries are all making
moves and confusing each other and
having imperfect communication and
trying to restore deterrence on one
another so that's the escalation spiral
part of the argument let's talk about
another issue Rogue actors I'll give you
an example of how proliferation enables
Rogue actors when the Soviet Union
dissolved in 1991 these newly
independent Republics of Russia Ukraine
Kazakhstan Belarus former Soviet
republics they suddenly had thousands of
nuclear weapons they had tons of fistle
material and we know that there were
black market attempts in the former USSR
to smuggle these materials out another
example of a rogue actor is that a
Pakistani nuclear scientist sold nuclear
materials to North Korea Iran and Libya
and mumar Gaddafi former dictator of
Libya in the early 2000s was pursuing a
nuclear weapons program in Libya it was
only stopped because the United States
and the International Community put
enough pressure on Libya and threatened
it with military action before it was
able to complete its own nuclear weapon
that's what it takes to stop the spread
of nuclear weapons and maintain a
peaceful equilibrium it takes constant
work to prevent nuclear proliferation
that's why our leaders keep talking to
us about this and explaining that this
is one of the most serious threats to
all of us it's one of our most important
shared priorities as a species to
prevent nuclear proliferation
all right we've talked about escalation
spirals Rogue actors let's talk about
nuclear accidents in 1961 a B-52 bomber
flying over Goldsboro North Carolina
carrying two hydrogen bombs suddenly
broke up in midair apparently there was
a fuel leak and the pilot was rapidly
descending and the weight on the plane
got uneven because of the loss of fuel
the right wing broke off the plane the
people in the plane ejected but what
happened to the bombs well what happened
when the plane exploded is that one of
the bombs did start to enter the normal
detonation sequence beginning with
deploying its parachute and slowing its
descent toward the ground this bomb
thought for all intents and purposes
that it was being dropped in a war zone
did I mention these were 3.8 Megaton
nuclear bombs so just imagine the full
destructive power of the Hiroshima bomb
times 250 this bomb was ready to
Massacre literally millions of Americans
if it had detonated
luckily there were a number of
safeguards installed in the bomb and one
of them ultimately worked in the sense
that it didn't explode it didn't kill
millions of Americans but look at how
close it got first of all there was a
pin that you had to pull out of the bomb
to allow it to arm well it got
unintentionally pulled when the aircraft
disintegrated the bomb basically Twisted
out of its pin there was this lanyard in
the Pilot's cockpit that the pilot was
supposed to pull to take out the pin
well the bomb Twisted out of it it
essentially pulled the lanyard
automatically because the whole fuselage
was spinning so there were a lot of
cental forces pulling on it let's talk
about the other safety mechanisms on the
bomb to prevent it from accidentally
detonating there was a pressure sensor
to make sure that the bomb had to fall a
certain amount before detonating well
those conditions were met before the
bomb hit the ground so that circuit was
closed there was an impact sensor in the
nose to make sure that the bomb only
detonated when there was a hard impact
well there was a hard impact and turns
out the impact sensor had triggered
there was an orientation sensor to make
sure that when the bomb was falling with
this parachute it was going nose down
and it wasn't falling too fast well
those conditions were met too it was
falling nose down and not too fast each
and every one of the bomb safety
mechanisms that were supposed to prevent
accidental detonation they were all
circumvented except for one it's called
the MC 772 arm safe switch this is
actually a low voltage switch only 28
volts the point of it is to connect the
Pilot's control panel to the higher
voltage arming mechanism inside the bomb
what's supposed to happen on a normal
day when a pilot wants to kill millions
of people is that they would press a
button in their cockpit which sends a
28v signal to the MC 722 arm safe switch
the switch has a solenoid an
electromagnet which closes a mechanical
circuit and then there's a higher
that it triggers 28 volts is a pretty
weak signal fortunately in this case of
the B52 over North Carolina when the
plane broke up the pilot didn't press
that button and there was no stray 28v
signal passing through any of its
circuits there was no short circuit or
anything but that was very close to
being a single point of failure because
that's pretty low voltage and you do get
electrical shorts all the time in fact
this particular arm safe switch
apparently has over 30 known incidents
of being operated inadvertently by stray
electrical currents and in fact some to
have studied the B-52 crash over
Goldsboro North Carolina have concluded
that it was only the correct operation
of this low voltage switch that saved
millions of Americans that little switch
was the one and only Factor standing in
the way of a 3.8 Megaton nuclear
explosion on us soil 250 Hiroshima
prevented by 128 volt switch keep in
mind when you put pilots in a plane with
all these different safeguards you're
still assuming that the pilots are
mentally healthy and don't particularly
want to kill millions of people or start
a nuclear war the movie Doctor Strange
Love classic by the way highly
recommended shows what happens when it's
not the case that everybody in the whole
chain of command is mentally healthy we
also depend on commanders like vasili
aripov the one in the nuclear submarine
to be more than just rational and
mentally healthy to be willing to
disobey their orders to retaliate in the
name of defense and mutually assur
destruction in the show notes I'm
putting up a link to Wikipedia's list of
nuclear accidents and you can see dozens
of historical examples where the humans
involved didn't want to Nuke Humanity
but almost did anyway so Ben what
happens when we around with nukes
do we get more safe or less safe more
proliferation doesn't mean more safety
it means more escalation spirals more
Rogue actors and more accidents and
that's why nuclear proliferation
is bad
and keep in mind these three different
types of issues with nuclear
proliferation they can combine you can
mix and match individual incidents that
involve these three factors take the
famous 1983 Soviet nuclear fossil arm
with stanislav Petro you're going to see
all three factors it was during the Cold
War so you've got an escalation spiral
you're going to see a key actor who had
to make the right decision and you're
going to see a system malfunction
essentially an accident briefly on the
night of September 26th 1983 an early
warning Soviet satellite detected five
intercontinental ballistic missiles from
the United States heading toward the
Soviet Union stanislav Petrov the
lieutenant colonel on duty at the Soviet
Air Defense command bunker decided not
to report it up the chain of command
because it didn't make sense to him why
the US would only launch Five missiles
instead of a larger attack Petro's
report would likely have triggered an
immediate retaliatory Nuclear Strike
because of the doctrine of mutually
assured destruction and the military
commanders would need to make their
launch decision within minutes highly
recommend reading Annie Jacobson's new
book nuclear war to see this kind of
nightmare scenario explained in shocking
detail how within minutes a first strike
or a perceived First Strike can just
lead to allout nuclear war and it's just
game over it's too late to undo all
these crazy spur of the- moment
decisions if you've read up on all these
close calls that I mentioned and dozens
more that I haven't mentioned it seems
pretty disingenuous to go on a podcast
and talk about how there hasn't been any
nuclear
activity we haven't had any nuclear
and and there's a very very specific
reason for that CU everybody's got nukes
no nuclear activity just a constant
background stream of escalation spirals
Rogue actors accidents that almost
massacred millions or Worse that's what
you mean by no nuclear activity right
Ben's Venture Capital firm and Reon
Horowitz has $44 billion in assets under
management people trust him with their
money so it's striking that he would
casually go out on a public interview
and have this attitude about nuclear
proliferation and use that as his
justification for his firm's position on
open- Source Ai and
AGI to me that signals a lack of
responsibility a lack of judgment a lack
of
integrity and you know it's not just
been within a16z here are a couple of
the other partners Martin cassado and
Mark Andre talking about what happens
when any technology gets arbitrarily
powerful if you have a tool that's you
know arbitrarily powerful that actually
doesn't change equilibrium States and so
you could have something that goes and
does arbitrarily bad but then you would
just create something that does
arbitrarily good and you're back in
equilibrium state right and so it's kind
of this kind of very
dorismar you've got the capability for
doing both and we back in to your point
early Reb back in equilibrium and it
turns out even though that we've got
more deadly weapons we're killing much
less people you know as a result yeah
100% look there's no I actually think
like I actually think Warfare is going
to get a lot safer okay but guys in the
case of nuclear weapons technology you
have the US government and 190 countries
telling you that nuclear
nonproliferation is essential to human
survival we built a powerful tool the
nuclear bomb and it did change
Humanity's equilibrium State the new
equilibrium is that we're constantly
living one nuclear launch away from an
accident prone sequence of events that
creates hell on Earth in 992 minutes as
detailed in Annie Jacobson's excellent
new book nuclear war is that what you
guys call an equilibrium I mean if you
could snap your fingers and make every
nuclear bomb disappear and make Humanity
forget the knowledge of how to build
nuclear bombs you wouldn't do it because
you're so happy with a new equilibrium
for most nuclear war experts their
Wildest Dream would be to snap their
fingers and get rid of nuclear weapons
technology to make nukes physically
impossible or to make it so that no
human has ever discovered nukes or wants
to build nukes that's a better
equilibrium according to them because
the fact is there's no principle that
says we get to survive any technology
that we build with any level of
proliferation where is Martin even
getting this idea of a Perpetual
equilibrium state if you have a tool
that's you know arbitrarily powerful
that actually doesn't change equilibrium
States and so you could have something
that goes and does arbitrarily bad but
then you would just create something
that does arbitrarily good and you're
back in equ liberan state right wrong
that's not always necessarily true if
the world's governments don't keep
investing heavily in nuclear
non-proliferation we'll all die more
nuclear proliferation doesn't get us
more of something arbitrarily good in
return we don't have plot armor we don't
get to stay alive because the author of
our story thinks that it's better for
the plot if we invent a powerful new
technology and we up the Safeguard
then we die that's the story We All Die
the end it's a shitty story I don't like
it it just happens to be one of the most
likely candidate stories that's going to
actually play out in reality when we
build a new technology that has the
power to kill millions and then we don't
keep it under control and it
proliferates then we die that's what
happens see as you can see the more you
around the more you're going to
find out okay that's my message to Ben
Horowitz and the rest of the a16z
partnership on the most obvious Topic in
the world nuclear
non-proliferation but why do I care well
I do think nuclear risk in general is
underappreciated and this episode stands
on its own as an explanation of why that
is whoever needs to hear that nuclear
proliferation is bad you can point them
to this episode but also I specifically
wanted to go after a16z because they
play a big role in shaping the discourse
around AI regulation despite being
generally Reckless and coess what does
it mean to you if a16z partners are
confused about arguably the most
important issue in all of modern
geopolitics that nuclear proliferation
isn't good it isn't a stable equilibrium
it's an ongoing struggle that our
elected leaders are committed to
fighting on our behalf day after day
with no end in sight no stable solution
in sight just an unprecedented level of
background existential risk thanks to
this new technology that used to not
exist if Ben Horowitz in a16z can't even
appreciate the obvious existential risks
of nuclear weapons
proliferation why would anyone ever take
them seriously on the topic of AI
regulation thanks for watching and
remember if you support doom de bates's
mission of raising the Public's
awareness of AI Extinction threat and
raising the quality of discourse so that
people get called out when they go on
other podcasts and casually dismiss risk
of nuclear weapons proliferation if you
support this kind of thing then
subscribe share with your your friends
and hey come on over to my substack and
type in your email address it's at D
debates.com and you're going to get some
bonus content if you do that I got a few
episodes coming up in the pipeline
there's going to be debates there's
going to be reaction episodes there's
going to be more tiffs stay tuned for
that and I'll see you soon on the next
episode of Doom debates