Fraser Kane what is your P Doom I can't
see how we stop it and I don't like the
solutions to make it stop like I think
centralized control may just be the only
alternative yeah and and again that's
awful and and I hate that and and I feel
like nobody has thought of a way through
this if you're a super intelligent
civilization and there's a star buring
that's basically a terrorist we living
in a simulated universe is a deeply
scientific question and it has an answer
and now I'm going around saying like I
don't believe in God I just think that
we're probably living in some higher
intelligences creation and he might be
listening to
[Music]
us welcome to D debates today I've got a
very interesting and different type of
guest it's Razer Kane you may know from
YouTube Fraser tell me a little bit
about yourself and what gets you
interested in AI Doom sure so um you
know people might know me as the
publisher of the universe today website
and I have been doing uh space and
astronomy explainer videos News
interviews and such here on YouTube I'm
the co-host of the astronomy cast
podcast and so I've been a space science
journalist for the last 25 years and
have written thousands of Stories We
have tens of thousands of Stories on
Universe today mostly we talk about you
know fairly uh more normal discoveries
by James web Space Telescope and and
interesting new uh exploration in the
solar system but I am drawn like a moth
to the flame to sort of ideas of um you
know Advanced civilizations techos
signatures ways we could discover
whether or not we're alone in the
universe because it is sort of like the
most deep philosophical question that I
think Humanity can almost ask um and my
background is in computer science that's
my degree and worked for a bunch of tech
startups and firms before uh deciding to
sort of go into full-time uh journalism
so you know I sort of have feet in both
sides and both understanding the
technology and sort of watching its rise
and growth and then at the same time
taking advantage of it to be able to
communicate space and astronomy
better got it what's kind of your
favorite idea to focus on uh when you do
uh your channel when you're thinking
where to go with that that's kind of
like your main thing yeah so what I like
best is what is a problem that needs to
be solved what is a clever idea that
somebody has had what is something that
just has now become possible and those
are the kinds of stories that I'm most
interested in and so you know you will
hear about some new way that maybe
someone can use a Space Telescope to be
able to observe something that we never
knew was possible before or there's a we
know there's a problem with dust on the
moon and someone has come up with a
really clever idea to be able to solve
this problem or maybe make a problem you
know mitigate it in some fact so so I'm
very interested in realistic solutions
to near-term problem s or really clever
ideas to help make some kind of Headway
towards a challenging mystery that has
been befuddling astronomers for a very
long time and so whenever I see those I
tend to task a writer to to try and
cover a story about
that great okay so just to frame this
conversation uh obviously we come from
kind of different areas I'm from
computer science and I spent a lot of
time thinking about AI doom and you
clearly focus on the universe and
cosmology I think we're going to touch
on an interesting intersection which is
that if you look at grabby aliens it's
kind of at the intersection of life and
intelligence and cosmology so it turns
out maybe they're more related than
people may realize but besides that I
want to spend a lot of the conversation
just talking to you as an interested
amateur right like I'm definitely not an
astronomer I don't know what I'm talking
about but luckily I think most of my
viewers probably don't know any more
than me so I think that'll still be
interesting to to hear what you have to
say sound good yeah totally yeah I mean
I think
that
that if if computers and Robotics are
the way that we will explore the
universe this has very real implications
on what we could perceive our future to
turn into and then gives us glimpses and
insights into what we should be looking
for out in the universe to see other
civilizations doing the kinds of things
that we might do so so it has become an
astronomy question
absolutely yeah exactly right so before
we dive into the cosmology stuff your
wheelhouse let me also get the lay of
the land uh from my perspective so I got
to ask you the most important question
ready for it
mhm Fraser Kane what is your P Doom I
would say it's about
50% okay wow can you unpack that a
little yeah I mean I mean I know sort of
all of the arguments the very specific
arguments about loss of control and that
kind of stuff my concern is more
about our increased technology as a
ratchet for personal um impact on the
world that when you think about say
nuclear
weapons 50 years ago 75 years ago it
required a nation state to be able to
generate nuclear weapons and the like
the largest nation states there was
really one and then there was two and
then it became possible for smaller
nation states to be able to do this and
it would have just kept going if nuclear
arms proliferation treaties hadn't been
developed to kind of put the halt on
that and then you see that same kind of
ratcheting up in other kinds of
Technology people's ability to do
bioengineering and and now computers and
so I think that just over time there is
this
accelerating capability by smaller and
smaller groups to have a bigger impact
on the rest of the planet and there
doesn't seem to be a way to stop this
and So
eventually the the ability to cause mass
destruction will fall into a group that
has 10 people maybe one person and that
feels like this you know like I don't
know how it plays out how it we move
towards that but it feels like that is
the way this all Trends towards and I
and I can't think of a way to stop
it yeah yeah I I got to agree I mean
you're you're basically saying what I
consider the correct answer from Channel
um it's very similar my perspective um
and the way you explained it sounds a
lot like Nick bostrom's vulnerable World
hypothesis right where you just each
technology is kind of like pulling out a
new ball from an ear of balls and
eventually we'll get a black ball which
is like one that allows even just one
person to end the universe because it's
so
powerful yeah I mean I think that's it
and then you kind of you sort of Imagine
like yeah if you put off things like the
nuclear arms proliferation
treaty then then that sort of maybe puts
a line in the sand against one of them
but then other ones can continue to
March forward and there's like there too
many fronts to try to put a a break on
on all of them and and I think that as
these things accelerate I mean we see
examples of you know both of us come
from a computer science background like
you see how computers can just not do
what you hoping that they would do yeah
and if the consequences are huge then
you're going to see negative outcomes
and uh it just feels like more fronts
are opening up in what people are
personally capable of doing when they're
augmented by technology to carry out
their whims and without some final just
wall lineing in the sand that just says
okay we can't go any further we're not
allowed to make you know till we get the
butlerian Jihad you know we're not
allowed to move forward anymore um it
just it just keeps getting eroded and
someone will figure that out and and I
don't even like this you know like what
is the possible solution some kind of
right authoritarian single super
intelligence that watches over us like a
you
know a helicopter mom that won't let us
do anything that's even potentially
dangerous that doesn't sound fun either
so uh I I I can't see how we stop it and
I don't like the solutions to make it
stop and so I feel like we just keep
marching forward to
some weird
future I mean what you said is
fascinating right because when you're
kind of like look unless we have like a
berian Jihad it's just like you and I I
don't think either of us find that idea
appealing right like you just said like
that's not fun right like we are not
commies trying trying to like install no
no I love my
technology exactly right so I I feel
like the mature technologists and even
mature Libertarians the ones who are
just like adult are just looking at the
situation and being like look
Independence is great freedom is great
but like this is like a real game
theoretic problem here like empowering
one random person to end the world like
I think centralized control may just be
the only
this and not just on a like okay if we
can just take our llms and we can just
open them up and we can examine how the
memory is working and we understand and
we can change their behavior we can make
sure that they're guaranteed to be on
our side then you still have the ability
of a single human being to cause Mayhem
when they run one of these perfectly
aligned AIS to do Mayhem for them
so I think that the sort of the deeper
sociological
issue is is waiting in lurking in the
shadows after the alignment conversation
has finally been wrapped up and and I
don't know and I and I think that like
until somebody's made serious progress
on that sort of philosophical
Direction um I just feel uncertain about
the future yeah yeah and I totally agree
I mean as you say it's like even if we
solve alignment and we can get it really
aligned to its one human Master it's
like okay then what right there's still
another problem right and that's that's
really why my own pdom is so high
because it's kind of like a tangle of
thorns it's like great you got one thorn
out of the way but like the other Thorn
still choke you or whatever right like
there's so many thorns that we're about
to head into um yeah okay when you say
your PD is 50% I'm just curious do you
kind of mean like all humans going
extinct by around 20 40 is 50% because
that's what I say how would you tweak
that yeah I'm like I haven't thought
through the various specific Doom
scenarios in that level of of clarity
like it's just this uneasy feeling about
us barreling towards a future that I
don't think we understand the
consequences and don't feel like the
kinds of people who should be taking
this seriously are taking it seriously
enough and then that that's sort of
balanced by me looking at myself going
don't be freaked out everything's fine
it always works out fine you'd be amazed
at how clever Solutions arrive at the
last minute I mean know like I talk
about that every day and so I Waffle and
I uh search and scan and I don't sort of
think about it very specifically and I'm
also you know always trying to be aware
of like the last cogent argument that I
heard from somebody May dig a little too
deep into my psyche and try to you know
resist that urge as well so I'm I'm
happy right now to kind of just be in
this Wilderness wandering around
thinking about the
problem the way you're coming on my show
and and talking about this like so open
and so logically and rationally and
maturely I feel like I don't see enough
of people saying this kind of stuff you
know serious respected intellectuals
like yourself who've built up quite an
audience for a good reason I just don't
see this discourse happening enough
right yeah I mean even the I've been
watching interviews on your channel and
I watch you know interviews with very
respected computer science professionals
versus um you know people like ilar
yakow ski and
it's just it's just so frustrating
because it's like it's not a cogent
conversation being had it's this weird
uh you know let's describe like what
does it mean to be alive you know and
you're having sort of St wol I'm right
the recent yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah you
know I want to dig too deep but yes yeah
so like you're you're seeing these
philosophical descriptions of terms and
arguments about terms and I and I think
that that it doesn't feel like like
people are just
really having direct conversations about
the kinds of challenges that we face
right now and it makes me you know just
like a little frustrated because it's
just you know so many times I'm
listening to the these kinds of debates
and I'm just like going you're just
talking past each other like what what's
going on here why aren't you just
listening and and at least wrestling
with these ideas and so there's like
this shell that I don't seem to have I
don't know and like maybe I'm just uh
too easily influenced by things but I
feel but but when we get into this
conversation you're going to see I hold
beliefs that are radically different
from almost anyone you're going to talk
to about space the universe aliens
things like that so I do come to things
I think from first
principles right and that's you know it
could just be one of those things where
the human brain is just so wired to snap
to a certain set of assumptions right
like the assumption that like the of the
world isn't going to be in your hands in
like the current generation right it's
just like it's it's a major blind spot
for potentially that being the case yeah
I mean the fate of the world is going to
be in the hands of somebody at some
point yeah someone will will have the
fate of the world in their hands and for
the first time in human history you know
when with the Advent of nuclear weapons
it became in the hands of somebody and
now we're always pet right who decided
not to fire the nukes and start the war
yeah exactly I mean we're always G to
have the future of the planet in the
hands of somebody from this point
forward and now it's just about trus in
people you know before nuclear weapons
no one person could really wreck up this
planet now they can't right going back
to what you were saying about like the
way the discourse is so weird and like
why aren't why are people talking past
each other have you seen don't look up
yep yeah I I watched that movie uh just
a few weeks ago actually I didn't watch
it when it first came out in 2021 but I
watch it I was uh on the edge of my seat
like this because it was just so real
like conversations like you know the
scientists would come on the show being
like uh Hey so we got like six months to
impact and the host would be like all
right uh let's talk about this celebrity
dropb like they just kind of moved on
yes yeah yeah and I mean we see that in
I mean we would absolutely see that in
the the actual reality of an asteroid um
you know I mean I have tons of H
with the movie about about parts of that
but you know obviously what they were
talking about was was global warming
that you know we are facing this serious
threat that is increasing and the kinds
of discourse that's going on around it
you know the what you should do is you
should have some common agreed truth
about the science and then you can have
policy conversations about how to deal
with the situation but if you can't even
get past what is true then you're just
kicking the can down the road until
finally nature inevitably shows you what
truth is is and you know nature always
you know reveals itself
eventually for me the part of do look up
that really unsettled me was that
scientist you know Dr Peter ishell
because for me it was just a Perfect
Analogy to today's AI companies right to
open AI to Ilia satk where their whole
thing is like look yeah okay this
thing's coming like we see it and so
here's the plan we're going to send our
robot there right it's going to extract
the minerals it's going to bring the
minerals to Earth and then also will
like blow up the asteroid and like
everything will work out fine and that's
basically what ilas suer for example
right he's considered like the
responsible and or like Dario idate
their plan is like yeah don't worry
we're going to do it we're going to rush
over there we're going to keep building
it as fast as we can and then also we're
going to make it safe and everybody's
going to win it's the same naive the
same
recklessness yeah yeah I
mean I mean I think there's a like we
wouldn't even be having this
conversation if lm's hadn't jumped into
being a lot more effective and Powerful
within the last couple of years and so I
think if if open AI truly did want to
demonstrate the capability of this
technology and sort of make a wake up
call to everybody then I they did it
they pulled it off we are we are
watching with sort of wrapped attention
as this technology continues to progress
and but then how do you both make that
sustainable because it's just a place
place where you set money on fire um and
continue to make the safety progress
move forward so I
like I think it was important that they
showed us what's possible and and our
response or they yeah our response
should have been okay we are we are
shook what do we do now as opposed to um
you know AGI wi right this is great but
give me
AGI yeah no exactly I mean just uh you
know I can't get the movie out of my
mind you know the moment I hate to spoil
it but that you know after uh Peter
iSell he tries this project right they
send the robot to the asteroid and it
just doesn't work right and then it's
like an hour later like that's it right
the asteroid impacts the Earth
everything's done like you did this
Gambit that was Reckless you failed
we're all dead like to portray that in a
movie to me is like very
profound right but but imagine if
the if in fact whether trying to do is
show people that the asteroid even
existed that it was even on this
trajectory right and then by doing that
maybe they didn't succeed at their first
thing at least they revealed the
existence of the asteroid and I think
that's more like what the people that
tusar and you know and various people
were trying to do but then you know if
you are funded by venture capitalist if
you're funded by Partnerships with large
corporations then you can't get off that
treadmill at that point if you take a
penny of money from some outside
influence then now your job is to
increase shareholder value no matter
what that's a good point that before Sam
and Ilia took on the role of Peter
Israel in the beginning they were uh the
Leonardo De Capri right they were the
scientist who saw it in the distance um
and I don't know if you saw the recent
leaked not leaked but you know the
deposition emails from open aai like
going from like 2014 to the Pres did you
see those emails no no it's very
interesting yeah it's like uh it's it's
a few pages worth of emails where you
can see those private exchanges you know
I don't I feel like the legal system is
like pretty terrible with privacy these
situations or but they like dumped all
these emails so you can see what Greg
and Ilia and Elon Musk were all saying
to each other and this it's like
fascinating historical documents uh and
one thing that struck me was I think
what the very first email that Sam sent
off to email if I to Elon if I remember
correctly was him saying like do you
think it's possible to not build AI when
he said that it reminded me of how he
was doing y commentator talks at the
time where he was basically saying like
yeah I think AI is going to destroy
everybody probably like it looks bad but
at least we'll build a bunch of great
startups along the way like he was kind
of like a Doomer at that point before
and he even asked El he's like how do we
stop this and his conclusion was like
well I don't think we can so let me just
try to like be at the Forefront of it
right right and and it could very well
be that you live in the yeah you live
live in the bubble long enough and you
you start to think I can pull this off I
can navigate this complicated obstacle
course and and pull one you know and
then win one for
Humanity yep exactly and he's talked to
those terms like I I've clipped him
saying um I think we can manage our way
through this fine really I mean because
my beef is to not grapple with the
possibility that actually we can't
manage our way through this fine like we
are facing down at off where if you
estimate the size of the obstacle you
have to be open to the possibility that
the obstacle is too hard to solve or by
orders of magnitude like you have to
open your mind that that may be the case
and if it looks like that's the case
then you have to stop yeah but you know
they will say well if we stop then
somebody worse is going to keep going
and they're right yeah so right right
right you know so you know the the all
of the arguments are completely
logically consistent and if the US
decides it's not going to do it then
China will
so so progress marches on the machines
spit out gold until they catch the
atmosphere on
fire okay great so that that's a really
great introduction that we both kind of
have the the same perspective on
Humanity right like fragile world like
what being a mature adult looks like so
a lot of common ground here um so how
about let's let's dive into uh cosmology
and Aliens sound good sure yeah finally
yeah finally all right so coming at it
as just just a naive AI focused Observer
um and most of what I know is what I
just picked up uh as like side side
notes reading Pi Leong and Robin Hensen
over the years yeah uh so my first
question is do you agree that the
observable universe looks uninhabited
yes okay like in particular because
because some people like know doesn't
some people will say there's the the
Hidden Forest Theory or what the Dark
Forest like it's actually not what do
you think about that I don't buy it
so when you're on planet Earth and you
just get dropped on some random part of
planet Earth most of the time you're
going to be in what is going to feel
like Wilderness you're going to be in
the middle of the ocean you're going to
be in the middle of a forest you're
going to be in the middle of Antarctica
you're going to look around and you're
just going to see trees and rocks and
snow and Wildlife and it's going to feel
like you are in Wilderness every now and
then you're going to get dropped into a
city and you're going to look around you
look okay this is a city this is
inhabited this is there's a very clear
distinction between what an uninhabited
Wilderness looks like versus what an
inhabited human-built civilization
appears to be and when we look out into
the universe what we see is Wilderness
we see um un we see asteroids in their
raw form we see stars that are not
surrounded by Dyson swarms that are
harvesting all of the material we see
galaxies in this sort of inefficient uh
SP spiral shape like a flattened disc
when they could be a much more efficient
super massive black hole surrounding
other super massive black holes with
planetary constellations around them
organized in the most efficient way that
some Advanced civilization would would
want to see their Galaxy and you know
surveys have been done so you know a
Dyson swarm when you surround a a star
with enough solar collecting satellites
that they are blocking the light from
the Star you still have to let the heat
out otherwise you build and so you are
letting out an infrared signal out into
space that would be obvious and
astronomers have even done surveys
they've looked for examples of stars
that are surrounded by um satellites
that are that are giving off this
infrared signature in fact some have
claimed that they found some although
the evidence is quite weak and there's a
very Lal explation so so if there was a
dark force and there's a bunch of super
intelligent aliens who are doing tons of
productive activity but they just don't
want other racist to know about it
you're saying that would be really tough
because they just have to radiate some
energy well right so there's a couple of
parts to that one is they absolutely
have to radiate energy the other thing
is is that there's no way to hide so
planet earth has been you know when we
had the oxygen catastrophy about 500
million years ago when we got the rise
of of or even earlier anyway we got we
got cyanobacteria filling the atmosphere
on Earth with oxygen um it was a very
clear signal that anyone with a powerful
enough telescope could 500 million years
ago have noticed that something weird
was going on with planet Earth more
recently you know there are structures
on planet Earth the pyramids things that
were visible 5,000 years ago so you know
imagine a sphere around us 5,000 light
years away that people could be going
huh what are these weird pyramids that
are being built on the surface of planet
Earth the cities the civilizations that
started to show up the lights at night
um us the Industrial Revolution putting
pollution into the atmosphere
chlorofluorocarbons the results of
nuclear weapons tests like there are
tons of these they're called techno
signatures but there's things that
Humanity has done and that life did
before us that gives us this really
clear signal that something interesting
is happening on this planet before we
could develop the technology to try to
hide ourselves and so you know this idea
of the Dark Forest that all civiliz
civilizations wait in hiding
in this Dark Forest hoping not to let
out a peep that will cause anyone to
notice them oxygen gave up you know sold
you out 500 million years ago in your
atmosphere and you know we can't imagine
powerful enough telescopes today but
there is no reason why you couldn't
build a array of space telescopes built
into an interferometer that has a light
collecting Powers if it's 10,000 kmers
across that would allow you to resolve
features on the surface of an exoplanet
that are a couple of meters across like
you could watch a car driving on a
planet that is tens of light years away
with a powerful enough telescope and you
know we don't have them today but we
understand how one might build them and
so it's expected that some Advanced
civilization will do the same they will
build their telescopes they'll look
around and go okay alien alien alien
alien there there oh they just
discovered coal they're producing
they're having nuclear war and keep
tracks on track on of what everybody's
doing exactly so I think we both give a
high probability that the entire
observable universe doesn't have any
super intelligent life in it even the
far away galaxies where some people be
well look it's far away how do you know
and I'm like no I know I know because I
see so many stars just sitting there
burning like there's no way that super
intelligent life would let that happen
yeah so this idea that I mentioned that
people have done surveys for Dyson
spheres has been scaled up people have
also looked for what are called type
three civilizations which is that you
have a civilization that has turned
every single star in their entire galaxy
into a Dyson Sphere and so it's a right
and then maybe have rearranged the
positions of those stars in the galaxy
which which sounds sphere real quick
well yeah a Dyson swarm and Dyson Sphere
so you've surrounded your star with
solar collecting satellites that are
putting the energy of the star to some
use and you know we have already begun
doing this the James web Space Telescope
which is a satellite designed to collect
energy from the Sun the Hubble Space
Telescope all the various spacecraft
we've sent we are beginning to build our
Dyson swarm right it's just bits and
pieces you know it will accelerate into
the future as we launch more stuff the
harest I me when we cover the Earth and
solar panels we're doing a little bit of
a Dyson swarm yeah I mean that's moving
us towards our type one civilization but
we're also working on the type two part
at the same time um and so this idea
that okay you could actually move a star
into a new configuration it's doesn't
break the LI the laws of physics you
know idea of a stellar engine scat off
Thruster you can rearrange a Galaxy into
a more convenient shape and it would
also give off this very clear infrared
signal that would be obvious you know
you've got the amount of stars in a
galaxy and yet they are all just giving
off infrared that would be super weird
and astronomers would would have noticed
and they have looked like there there
are papers where people said we know we
conducted a survey looking with the wise
telescope for uh type three
civilizations and we didn't find any and
so you know there could be some out
there but they are not the predominant
thing that is out there which is what
you would expect if civilizations were
running a muck out there and you know
you say okay you know you don't think
that there's any advanced civilizations
out there you know I take that argument
even further which is that I don't think
there's any life out there at all like
that that planet Earth
you know the the implications for me is
that because it is
this jump from step to step to step to
step to get you to an advanced
civilization that then causes a
noticeable effect on their environment
because we don't see that then then none
of these sort of uh Pathways have begun
on any Planet out there in the uh in the
Galaxy or in the argument that if there
was uh sub intelligent life out there
then some of it would have become super
intelligent and created a signature for
us is that basically how your reasoning
exactly right that that it seems like
you know darwinian evolution is such a
forcing function that drives things to
and intelligence is such a
powerful um evolutionary advantage to
get to that you're going to see
intelligence pop up and we see here on
Earth convergent evolution we've seen
multiple examples where various
creatures have developed levels of
intelligent as the best strategy to
thrive in their environment and you know
parrots octopuses you know champ we
were're related to them but you can
still see that that that intelligence
has value and it's it's not like it only
popped up one time it's popped up
multiple times not to the same level
that we have you know we won okay so
right what you're talking about now
going from the relationship between
seeing super intelligent life and
expecting to see less that intelligent
life I want to get back to that in a
second but I just have a couple more
thoughts uh on our previous topic of how
like the universe really looks devoid of
super intelligent life uh one thought I
have is that if you're a super
intelligent civilization and there's a
star burning that's basically a
terrorist because number one it's
wasting so many resources right it's
like wasting enough resources that it
could power a huge civilization like
many trillions and trillions
quadrillions like if if you put an
economic value on it right it's it's
destroying so much possible life and
Happiness by just you know fusing those
Adams and doing nothing with them right
so first of all it's destroying a lot of
value and then second of all it's not
just going off and doing a crime it's
live streaming the crime so you have to
watch this crime happen every day that's
terrorism sure um I mean you know when
you I mean there's value there's
aesthetic value in Stars being Stars so
I don't think you need to necessarily
kind of go well you know any uh any
ongoing fusion reaction is a waste of
the universe's valuable resource
but a civilization that is Advanced
enough will go that is that is a shame
that someone isn't putting that that
just like really just a blob of hydrogen
to better use so um so yeah I mean I
think the point is is that a
civilization will reach a point and if
what they want is to maximize their
their potential impact on the future of
the universe they're going to attempt to
acquire as as much resources as possible
and and not just because you know that's
greed at a cosmological scale but you
could do this as a Bull workk against
other people who have more ill
intentions you know you want to create a
very peaceful very just Galactic society
and you're aware that there are the sort
of screaming hellbent AI uh terrorists
that show up and only with having a lot
of resources at your disposal can you
stop them you know that the culture
deals the culture series of books deals
with this all the time with sort of
runaway Ai and and how they're
constantly having to put them back in
their bottles because they're you know
they don't respect polite um discourse
and so you can only do that with a lot
of resources at your disposal that's
another good point yeah so when the
super intelligent civilization sees a
star they're not just like oh my God
it's burning the grain that I was going
to feed to my children right like the
same way like terrorist comes and sets
your grain silo on on fire that's kind
of what the star is doing but even if
it's like okay well I want to have a
small family well I still need to go
grab the star just to help my defense
right because you have to expand if you
want a successful defense right right I
mean if we don't then someone else will
we're going to be peaceful about it
we're going to be benevolent we're going
to have a really highly evolved culture
that uh you know has all of
these high morality and yet we need to
have the ability to affect
the universe to defend it and that is
you know that that feels like that's
going to be a natural conclusion that
advanced civilizations will reach right
uh and going back to Dark Forest before
you know I'm not 100% confident that
dark Forest is false because I think the
best guess as to how it could be true is
just like what if there's like dark
energy or like dark neck enty just dark
something right so maybe they're
actually having a bonanza with this
other resource that we just don't know
about then they don't
matter right like if you know if like
we've got some kind of alternative
civilization that is living in a um
alternate universe that is just slightly
off-kilter from the universe that we
live in and we can't detect them we
don't interact with them it's as if they
don't they don't they aren't here it's
only if we actually will fight for
resources that it becomes a problem
right I mean maybe a good mental model
to help this conversation like imagine
it's like they live in the fourth
spatial Dimension and on our 3D our
whole 3D world is just like one slice
and they're like off parting in other
four-dimensional slices that we can't
see and I agree it doesn't matter except
if it's still causally connected where
they can like swipe at our slice
whenever they want and like kill us if
we get to up so that's that's kind of
like the Steel Man of the Dark Forest
hypothesis right and and that would have
implic you know if they can affect the
universe that we live in and the sort of
future light cone that we're enjoying uh
then we would see that as an effect in
the universe that's all so if they do it
then we would see it if they don't do it
then they might as well just not exist
exactly um there's another point I want
to come back to a little bit going back
to talking about uh what you said about
how like technology has signatures right
like it's not that hard to detect
whether you're just seeing like a jungle
or a desert compared to seeing you know
an alien power plant or a DIC worm um
this point seems pretty obvious and I
think it it traces back to uh William
paly's watchmaker argument right where
it's like oh I I visit an island and I
see like a pocket watch on the ground I
don't think that the pocket watch is
just like native to the Island's foliage
right so it's all obvious stuff but I
wanted to come back to it because I
heard step wolf from last week talking
to Al CI and this became an issue in
their debate stepen wol was like I don't
even think that I can recognize alien
techology I'm like what are you talking
about why is this still in 2024 the
debate we're having yeah yeah I mean if
it looked indistinguishable from Human
technology then you wouldn't recognize
it but if it is having some kind of
effect on the universe and it was not
crafted by human beings and is beyond
our capability then you would recognize
it you know an
ant recognizes you right an ant will
bite you like it knows you're there it
doesn't understand you it can't
communicate with you but it doesn't like
you and it wants to bite you and it's
hoping that you'll go away and so I
think you know that whole argument like
well maybe we just can't even perceive
them I mean we can see all kinds of
things you know we can detect the
presence of gravitational waves sweeping
past planet Earth changing the length of
the arms of the gravitational wave
detectors by fractions of a nanometer we
can detect incredibly sensitive things
with our instruments
today a a an advanced civilization
making a big impact on the universe
would be very obvious you know people
even proposed how you would detect warp
drives moving through the cosmos or
detect the the catastrophic destruction
of a warp drive ship you could detect
space wars with your gravitational wave
Observatory so you know just because we
don't
necessarily we we can't match their
technology doesn't mean that we couldn't
perceive them right right and a random
thought I I don't know if you have ever
thought about this but Robin Hansen
wrote this post last year about like
really high dimensional spaces which is
not something I'm good at thinking about
I don't think most people are but he
randomly made a comment that if you live
in a really high dimensional space you
don't really have that same luxury where
you can just kind of like look around
and expect to like see all the
interesting stuff going on sending
photons to you there's just like too
many dimensions so you just like there's
no such thing as really looking around
have you ever thought of that
no yeah but luckily you know in our
universe unless they're partying off in
higher Dimensions it it does seem like
we have a really strong ability to look
around yeah absolutely in in many
wavelengths with many instruments
looking in all directions all the time
with new ones coming online every day
exactly okay let's get back to what you
were saying about how you made a
connection between like okay clearly
there's no super intelligent life right
there there nobody's building Dix swarms
where we we have pretty good information
about that and you made the connection
of like well I bet nobody's even in
earlier stages of life just because
you'd expect to see some of them get
farther and and we don't and Ergo you
know that was your logic so this
connects to Robin Hansen famous concept
of the great filter right
kind of yeah I mean when you think about
the age of the universe that it has been
like Earth formed 4 and a half billion
years ago which is about 7 billion years
after 7 and a half billion years after
the universe itself formed and the Sun
is a third generation star made up of
the metals that came from the deaths of
previous Stars the the collisions of
neutron stars forming these heavier
metals and that there's a perfectly
valid argument that that we wouldn't be
here without the contributions of the
previous generations of of stars but in
fact you know if you continue that that
sort of thought experiment the universe
was viable for Life probably 2 to three
billion years before where we are today
so you know about two billion years
before the sun formed there was enough
of this concentration of heavier
elements organic materials things like
that that you would get life being
possible to form on planets that's two
billion years Head Start that other life
forms have had in the universe over us
and if and if life would appear on any
one of those worlds then we would expect
it to have you know would have a two
billion year Headway on a head start on
what we've been able to accomplish and
so that's that's sort of the Crux of of
the argument for me is we don't see that
and bolted into that is the expectation
that a civilization will advance to a
point that it reach a space flight and
then it will
begin exploring if not colonizing the
rest of the Galaxy that it finds itself
in and so it should be everywhere um you
know the analogy that I always use is
like you've got some new island that
appears in the Pacific Ocean from a
eruption by a volcano and there's no
life on it whatsoever and then a spider
is is blown off course and and arrives
on the island and then you know plants
and trees and other bugs and stuff you
come you show up 10,000 years later and
there are spiders everywhere right they
have completely colonized the entire
Island it doesn't matter where it
started where it ends is there are
spiders everywhere reaching the sort of
Evol evolutionary limit of the of the
island and so for
me the the you know how that ties into
the gr filter which was you sort of your
question like this is the idea that okay
maybe you know my preference is that
we're unique and alone in the universe
because the great filter argument says
oh actually something horrible happens
to every single civilization before it's
capable of that
exponential exploration and colonization
of their surroundings that you know any
spider that is about to try to
get off the beach something horrible
happens to it and it happens 100% of the
time and so whatever stopped the tens of
millions of civilizations that attempted
to go
Interstellar is now waiting for us to
make the same inevitable 100% mistake
that will stop us from being able to go
Interstellar and I don't like that
probably yeah it doesn't work like that
yeah okay yeah yeah no it probably
doesn't work that it's like I don't like
la la la I'm not
listening I don't like it right not that
I don't find it you know it's of course
it's a compelling argument I just choose
another path let me try to recap this
from the viewers because some of them
probably don't remember what the great
filter is so Robin Hansen's great filter
it's just the idea that if you go back
to the fery Paradox and the Drake
equation it's basically saying look you
have to have some equasion where the
frequency of Life occurring on a planet
is going to be like one in 10 the power
of I don't even know 24 right like some
power of like how many stars we know
about and we don't know about life on
any of them so that you have to get this
really small number as to the
probability of like observable super
intelligent life because we only know
about one in the whole observable
universe and then Robin Hansen comes in
and he's like okay yeah you're going to
get this small number but what are the
steps getting you to that number like
what what hard things do you have to
multiply together their probability to
get this final low probability and maybe
one of those steps is like the hardest
step and we can call that the Great
filter right is that roughly what Robin
was saying yeah I mean I mean the gist
is that there
are difficult steps that life had to
take to get to the place where we are
today that it had to even form in the
first place that it had to go into
multicellular life it had to get onto
land it had to develop intelligence it
had to develop technology it had to
develop space flight and then it had to
not X right right um and we have passed
all of those we know we went
multicellular we developed technology we
intelligence and so if those those steps
have been passed by us but not by by
everybody else that is a possibility but
that's pretty unusual the other
possibility is that there are still
filters in our future but what we see
when we look out into the universe is
that those filters take every single
civilization out by the end like they
are 100% effective because if even one
civilization slipped through the last
filter then we would see an entirely
civilized Milky Way right you get the
exponential uh colonization sort of
heading forward and yet there's no
reason like we are we are sending
robotic spacecraft into the solar system
we are developing 3D printing
self-replication artificial intelligence
like these things are right around the
corner for us probably within a hundred
years we will have the ability to create
self-replicating robot probes and we
send our Von noan probes out into the so
the great filter is running out of time
to get
us yeah I I strongly agree that the
universe is hackable so we're unlikely
to get into a situation where it's like
oh man nanotech is just like so hard to
build you know I see think pieces uh
regularly saying like come on you don't
realize how hard NCH is to build no
we're going to build NCH like just give
a sign like I'm pretty convinced yeah I
mean there are you know with the
discovery of UA mua which was this
Interstellar object passing through the
solar system about 5 years ago and then
within a year they discovered borisov
the second intersell object moving
through the solar system and now so once
you've got two then that gives you like
you can then make a calculation for the
the number of objects in the in the
solar system it's believe there's about
30,000 objects that have originated in
other solar systems that have been that
are now passing through the solar system
any number of them would have impacted
or you know interact with other parts so
you know if a dumb Rock can make the
journey a smart Rock can probably make
the journey that's a really excellent
point yeah it's a lower bound on on Mak
especially if we give we send like a
million at once right you just need a
one million chance to make the journey
doesn't seem too hard um okay so what
you were saying before where you were
saying we had there were two billion
years that like some life on some other
planet could have already gotten to the
super intelligence stage and showed us
something in the sky besides Stars when
you were saying that that implicitly
assumes or or that communicates that
your position is that you just don't
think that the great filter comes after
the origin of life right you think it's
relatively smooth sailing after the
origin of Life at least until the human
stage
um well I like I don't think the great
filter is relevant because because I
think that we're
alone right but I guess what I'm saying
is like imagine you can imagine
somebody's position is like I bet the
evolution from single cells to
multicellular life that's the hardest
step that's the true great filter and
we're the only ones who have ever passed
it and there's a bunch of single
cellular organisms living on a bunch of
other planets sure um you know there's
some really interesting research about
the ability for single cellular
organisms to make the jump to
multicellular people are now in the lab
able to push like yeast cells in and out
of
multicellular uh sort of communities and
not in the sort of the the same way that
we have with you know the
mitochondria enveloped by other you know
I don't really understand biology but um
but you know it it it appears that all
the things that we consider to be
potential filters there are workarounds
that life has already devised in many
different ways and can even be
demonstrated in the lab and you can sort
of look at each one of those things and
and see that you know
I've you know I've asked this question
directly to biologists you're like yeah
could single cellular organisms come
together in ways that could mimic
multicellular organisms and like yeah
there's no reason why that wouldn't be
possible and so you know in the same way
that an ant colony can act more
intelligent through some kind of
emergent Behavior than a single ant you
could have multiple Pathways getting to
those various destinations and so I
don't think that any of those things are
as hard lines as people make them out to
be life seems to find a way yeah so is
your best guess that something about the
origin of life whether it's like having
a planet with good enough conditions or
like just having the the bootstrapping
of you know a biogenesis like whatever
it was like the first RNA getting into a
replication cycle like do you think that
something back there in our early
history that was probably the great
filter and we're the only ones who have
passed it yeah I mean that's that's my
again that's my feeling um you know and
I'm a journalist not the a a scientist
and definitely not a biologist um but
but that's the one that we don't know
what the likelihood is to go from a
jumble of organic material to getting
the first
self-replicating molecule that can then
fall under some kind of evolutionary
process to continue on from that point
on what is the minimum bootstrap and we
really have no way to know I mean
scientists you know I've interviewed
plenty of people that are trying to
crack this problem and they feel in the
lab that they're they're exploring a lot
of really interesting ways that this
could happen but they're going to be
forcing it right as opposed to do you
just get what you need out of just a a
warm puddle that gets hit by a bolt of
lightning right yeah okay so one thing
Robin Hansen remarks when he originally
writes about the great filter is he says
it's good news if the great filter is
behind us you know what I'm talking
about MH y sure
um so I mean if if the great filter is
behind us then we did it right we we won
we passed all of the uh filters and we
came out the other side and now there
there's no reason why we can't then
continue on to whatever future we can
imagine into the universe yeah yeah
exactly right and and similarly or
there's a related observation where it's
like if if our scientists actually do
see signs of life that isn't super
intelligent yeah his example like okay
if we find proteins on mars or anything
like that he says that's actually
terrible news right because that makes
it seem like we are actually potentially
behind the great filter and we are just
going to die out or just never go super
intelligent yeah absolutely you know
it's sort of a you know a lot of people
can't wait they would love to find Life
on Mars and and I would too right like
to find some kind of independent Life on
Mars that's really exciting it shows you
that that life finds a way life is
everywhere you know don't don't ask the
okay fine so where is everybody question
you know don't think about that too much
just you know continue on with being
excited about the life that we found but
yeah the reality is that if you find
that life then it means that life is
everywhere and then it means that the
great filter is shutting it down you
know the great filter if we find Two
Worlds in the solar system that both
have formed life independently then that
tells you that probably there's going to
be one or two origins of life in every
single star system in the entire Milky
Way so you're looking at 200 billion
stars you know 200 billion times that
life formed and yet there's nobody
anywhere it means that the great filter
is brutal to every life form that that
forms and nobody gets out at the end it
is 100% effective and you can't even you
can't predict it you know even if you
think you've predicted it then you
haven't predicted it right like I think
that's the part that I always find so
unnerving is people are like well can't
we just figure out if we if we think we
know what the great filter is you know
don't make the science experiment don't
produce the artificial intelligence
don't create the bioweapons don't
develop nuclear weapons it's not those
it's something else right you can't
predict it because nobody you know the
universe or the Milky Way took 200
billion cracks at it and and nobody
outsmarted the final filter
let's talk about the common thing
everybody likes to ask me on this
channel which is like do you think super
intelligent AI is going to be the great
filter or it has been the great filter
what do you think no I I think um robots
love to go to space exactly right I
think that's the correct answer yeah
yeah so so no we we can feel pretty
confident because we don't see robots uh
tearing apart star systems and
reorganizing galaxies into a more
pleasing shape that that
that the the robot apocalypse was the
great
filter exactly right so if you think
that the great filter is in front of us
that doesn't mean that you think super
intelligent AI is going to kill us and
go to space it means you think we're
somehow going to get killed and nothing
will go to
space well remember I don't believe I
don't I don't like the great great
filter right so right so so so it's
meaningless to me about what is a
possible great
filter doesn't matter because we're
alone that's that's my position right
right so
um so and it seems to me like the one
that even if we don't wipe ourselves out
our robots are going to go to space like
like it could very well be that we're
going to send out our robots our Von
noan probes and they're going to head
out and they're going to be under
complete control and they're going to do
a great job and they're going to and
that is not a filter and yet we don't
see people even successfully sending out
their their robot uh Von noyman
swarms right okay all right um so you
and I agree that we're probably alone in
the observable universe and then now is
this a new position do you is this a new
position or is this one you held before
we started
talking I think they held it before we
started talking so I think um everything
you said pretty much agrees with how I
think about this stuff okay yep great
minds think alike there we go uh but
maybe maybe I'll find a point of
disagreement as I plow forward here um
when we start talking about the UN
Universe there's kind of a Twist and the
twist just kind of traces the life of
Robin Hansen here in mind he's he's been
highly influential to me so in 1996
that's when he invented the idea of a
great filter and you know that was
coming after like the Drake equasion and
the fmy Paradox which were a few decades
earlier than that um the next chapter in
the story as I see it is in 2021 so if
Robin Henson really had you 25 years to
to keep mulling this over in 2021 he
releases what I consider a breakthrough
and a lot of rationalist Doomer are kind
of on the same page I know leowski
considers it the best theory we have and
I agree which is grabby aliens right
kind of like an update to the great
filter um this one is a little bit tough
because it's it's a little bit mouthy so
I'm not sure I can fully do it justice
do you want to take a stab attic sure I
I don't think it has to be that
difficult right the gist is that if what
we've been talking about here that if we
looked out into the universe and we
would expect to see civilization
sort of having an impact on their
environments and that there's no reason
why a civilization as they get more and
more advanced will realize that okay the
best thing for us to do is to plant the
flag at roughly the like just shy of the
speed of light the fastest um that we
can explore that is the speed that we
should go and so you would expect as you
look out into the universe you would be
watching Advanced civilizations expand
exping their reach at just shy of the of
the speed of light however long it takes
for the light to get to
us and if you know if it was very slow
if they could only expand at say 10% at
the speed of light then you'd have a lot
of time to watch as their as their
bubbles of of colonization expand all
around us but if they are expanding it
just shy of the speed of light then you
really won't notice that they've arrived
and until the sort of the first Scouts
of their civilizations sweep past and
and let us know that we're going to be
assimilated as they as they continue on
and so what Hansen is saying is
that that we weirdly live in a bubble of
uncolonized space but it's just a matter
of time before one of those
civilizations you know we we enter the
territory we are you know part of a
larger civilization as they sweep past
and right that you can then use that as
a way to try to calculate the number of
civilizations that are out there in the
universe
do you think he's right that there's an
alien civilization approaching us at a
high fraction of the spe light well I
mean he's Robin Hansen so I'm not going
to you know and I'm the journalist here
not the not the scientist and he's the
mathematician in the economics so I
think it's really important to you know
to understand uh but I well he's wrong
on AI okay
sure um yeah so so I think he's wrong
yeah I do think he's wrong I think um I
mean don't have any problem with
anything that he says but it's almost
like he's more optimistic or pessimistic
I'm not sure about the number of
civilizations that are out there in that
he thinks there are some and they're on
their way and I think there are none and
they're not on their
way got it got it okay well so I think
finally he found where you and I disree
because going back to AI you know Robin
Hansen when he came on my show a couple
months ago his P Doom is like less than
1% which to me is not even in the San
Zone you got to give me 5% come on and
think it's a good idea there is Doom
then you know then we then we make a uh
you know it's just our ba our children
and let them go on and live a happy
future like Coe of the universe yeah
exactly yeah okay yeah my child is like
somebody who's just going to turn all
the earth into like some tiny molecular
structures like during my lifetime okay
that seems like a very badly behaved
child or you know like The Lovable Scamp
yeah exactly um okay so so we're not
really fans of his claims about AI but
you know I respect his approach and we
had a good debate uh but then when it
comes to cosmology funny enough I am a
fan of grabby aliens and like I said
even aasra owski is so this is kind of
like uh Doomer cannon at least to follow
up of the owski school that aliens are
are rapidly approaching us let me try to
say some of the things that are
appealing to me about the theory um the
theory or whatever the hypothesis grabby
aliens it's like very epistemological
like the reason why it works like the
gears of the grabby aliens model um you
kind of have to get why it's compelling
U to think you have to think deeply
about a asy I think I'll take a stab at
it it's like he's trying to answer the
question of like how do we make the
probability that we see what we see be
higher because a good theory is one that
would have assigned high probability to
what you're seeing does that make sense
so like he's trying to be like how does
it how do we make it look like we didn't
get as lucky as we feel like from the
perspective of Bas and epistemology when
you have different competing hypotheses
and then you turn over a new observation
you're supposed to reward the hypothesis
that said that the new observation is
the most likely you know and that's
basically Bay's rule is you multiply the
prior probability of the hypothesis by
the odds ratio meaning how much more
that hypothesis expected the New
Evidence compared to the other
hypotheses so what Robin Hansen is
giving us is a hypothesis that says that
the current observed empty word
is actually pretty likely if you
consider certain constraints right and
so the I guess my issue with that is
that the two billion years that the
Universe has had to cook life that two
billion years is a vast amount of space
that that that advanced civilizations
could could have reached Us by um you
know there's a you know it's sort of
depressing um but
96% of the cosmos has already fallen
over the cosmological horizon that only
4% of the universe we could actually go
at top speed and and reach like if we
went just shy of the speed of light we
could get to this sort of claimable
universe and the rest of it is outside
of our grasp unless we develop work
drives and and it's only about two
billion layers like it's not a large
amount of space that we could reach um
and so it just for me um it just doesn't
pass the gut check which is like the
universe that there
is tens of billions of galaxies within a
radius of us that could have developed
life in any one of those galaxies that a
civilization could then Advance begin
exploring and expanding outward at close
to the speed of light we should have
Fallen under the Empire of from every
direction at various points and yet
still we find ourselves in a place that
is Wilderness untouched unclaimed right
so that's so that so I I get the give
you his perspective
sure I think the perspective is
basically that like you know Earth has
basically like a four billion year
window five billion year window
something like that during which life
could evolve and then it's too late
right because Earth is no longer
hospitable to life and I think we've got
like the last few hundred million years
in that window coming up right now so we
we kind of caught it on the river right
like we were almost too late to actually
be life on Earth so Robin H's model is
just that like every time you have a
planet it turns out that there's a lot
of hard steps like there's a lot of
coincidence that that you need to chain
in a row maybe like six major
coincidences like what we talked about
like maybe being multicell maybe one of
those coincidences right the origin of
Life maybe one of those maybe sexual
reproduction is one of those
coincidences if you want to get all the
way to like get intelligence so whatever
it is there's like a few hard
coincidences that you need
and his theory at least the way I
interpret it is that a 4 billion or 5
billion year planet is kind of a long
shot to hit this chain of coincidences
so you have all these different planets
floating around in the observable
universe and they're all just like not
quite having enough time in the current
history of the universe like the
universe is like 14 billion years old it
might normally take more like a trillion
years to take enough uh shots at this to
have Planet succeed but we just got
really really lucky within our region of
the universe and then Robin Hansen goes
onto explain why in every region of the
universe you're basically just going to
have this one lucky planet that emerges
first and kind of ckers that region yeah
I mean it definitely took whatever three
and a half four billion years to get to
the place we are today with
multicellular organisms really only
arriving about half a billion years ago
but life
itself appeared on planet Earth as
pretty much as quickly as possible like
the second the had cooled down to the
point that life could form life did form
and you know even this idea of how much
longer we have left here on Earth up
until a couple years ago the estimate
was okay we only have about 500 million
years before the solar heating Cooks
planet Earth but in fact you know a new
paper just came out and I think Kipping
had even referenced it in his video that
in fact maybe we actually have more like
about two billion years left so so I
think the the part that we should be lot
more interested in is not how long Earth
has because there are plenty of star
systems out there that are vastly more
habitable in theory than than the solar
system is but more how quickly life
arose that this that that you know was a
very short period of time after the
planet had formed that life formed and
that's
surprising
because that's common then it should be
everywhere the observation Robin points
out is that let's say there's like six
hard steps and one of them is the origin
of life if you condition on the fact
that all the steps happened and here we
are then when you look back they'll look
easier than they are right because if if
if you if the whole universe is rolling
Dice and everybody's failing and one
planet succeeds and then you just look
back over the history of the planet
you'll be like hey look the first step
came quickly but that's not going to
actually give you much evidence about
how hard it really was yeah yeah and you
know like I said I think the the steps
are
um hard to Define and malleable with
life finding a way and and you know when
I research how long the universe has
been habitable for and even you know
there's some really interesting papers
that talk about the habitability of
other places that you know that you can
actually Envision a world that is
dramatically more habitable than Earth
is around a star that is drama you know
dramatically more habitable than the Sun
is that the conditions can be better in
lots of other places and so you know but
um you know if we've had two billion
years for advanced civilizations to get
to us and they haven't yet that means
you know Crossing Intergalactic gaps
that we're practically
alone right right right yeah and just to
recap so we both agree that we're alone
in the observable universe and maybe
I'll agree with you they were
practically lowed because my claim is I
agree with uh what I see as Robin's main
L even though he's very careful not to
be like this is my claim he's like look
it's just the model operate the model
however you want it but the way I
operate the model is I think that which
I feel like he hinting but whatever I
think there's aliens that are moving
toward us at a high fraction of the
speed of light because they want to
conquer everything uh and they're a
billion in a billion years we're going
to meet them and we probably our
successor will probably also be
expanding and like the wavefronts the
two expanding spheres of colonization
will meet and then I have no idea what
happens next and Robin Hansen doesn't
try to say what happens next but like
that's basically my model of what's
happening and so when you say we're kind
of like effectively alone or practically
alone I mean I agree with that like for
the next few 100 million years at least
is that fair yeah I mean I guess as a
basy and every year that goes by
shouldn't you be updating towards the
We're
alone I mean basanis is not that naive
right bism not just based on like taking
data points and then doing naive
induction or extrapolation on them it's
based on building every possible
detailed model of the world and then
having those models compete MH yeah yeah
I mean I I don't you know when the
grabby aliens hypothesis came out you
know it was very interesting and I even
interviewed Robin Hansen about it and
you know for
me um I don't think too deeply about it
I guess you know I don't really try to
wrestle with the the argument that
deeply I get it at the gist and and for
me it it is practically the same as us
being alone I mean you know I I I think
about this in terms of the the the
future of life in the universe that if
the universe is alone then and if we
fail at our shot to get out there and
actually explore the universe and and
help life Thrive be on the solar system
we're kind of failing to do that and and
one of the sort of thoughts that I have
is like if people expect that okay no
there's fast civilizations around us
that we can just seed the that
responsibility to somebody else somebody
else is going to help life survive in
the cosmos it won't be up to us and so
as we do damage to our planet as we uh
fumble the ball um then we're losing
that chance at having life survive in
the universe and I think life is better
than rocks trees are better than rocks
right that's a good point I mean if only
we could look over at the Andromeda
galaxy and be like oh those aliens look
like we're having a good they're having
a good time so at least if we nuke
ourselves yeah yeah yeah someone
someone's got it under control we don't
have to worry about it but right now I
think we H we should be concerned about
what is the future of the universe and
do we want it to go down a better path
or or a worse path or an empty path
right yeah it's like Carl San's pale
blue dot right it's like this is all we
have this one Earth like there are no
other aliens like and we're screwing it
up yeah yeah
exactly one thing uh that stuck with me
about uh Robin after reading his paper
is um he pointed out that if you believe
grabby aliens we are now back to seeing
the cosmos as a living cosmology like
the our observations about stars are now
explained by of intelligent or even
sentient agents which is kind of
mindblowing because if you go back like
2,000 years everybody's like yeah of
course there's like gods in space right
and then for a long time it was like
nope it's just dumb processes and now
here in 2021 if you believe Robin nansen
as I do you get to make statements like
ah yes our region of the universe is
empty because the gods are still on
their way
right um yeah like if you say
so yeah no I I I got that it's I've kind
of lost you other this point but just
want to throw that well yeah it's it's
it's just I find the you know at the end
of the day when you boil it right down
we only have an N of one which is our
existence here on on planet Earth the
formation of Life on planet Earth and
that the the grabby aliens is exciting
because it allows you to calculate how
far away the aliens must be to give us
the the universe that we see but the
alternative to that is that they're even
farther maybe infinitely farther right
um and both of those I think for me vi
in my in my brain um all right I can let
me try to get put up a little slight
debate for you if this is Doom debates
after all sure yeah so do you this is
the Doom that will that will that will
debate huh all right exactly is the
alien Armada coming yep exactly it's a I
like to keep the types of Doom fresh and
yeah uh okay so do you think that human
civilization or whatever replaces human
civilization like the AI whatever it is
do you think that we are going to turn
into a space colonizing
entity so
probably um because you know at the very
least it's it would be useful to send
out self-replicating robot probes to
other star systems to at least analyze
what's on them to build a map
of the Galaxy that we find ourselves in
you know we can just barely tell what's
out there wouldn't it be amazing if you
could bring up detailed computer maps of
every single star system every single
planet every single moon in the entire
galaxy that is a worthwhile scientific
Endeavor and then you know it is more
debatable more debatable about whether
or not there's value in extending beyond
the solar system at all um the lag you
said before you said off or expansion is
defense which I agree with yeah so so I
think that's the other part right so
there's the there's the knowledge and
there's the the defense but the problem
is so of you know and now I'm going to
argue with with earlier me um is that
the lag kills you that when you're
looking at attempting to communicate
with your uh your other City your other
your other Home world four light years
away then you're only able to
communicate so much information back and
forth and that other world is going to
uh sort of evolve into its own society
and and that sort of gets more and more
difficult as you get farther and farther
away from wherever was you know tranor
right um right so you kind of lose a
tight coordination you lose a tight
coordination and you're essentially
seeding the universe with potential
rivals in your attempt to prevent future
Rivals and I mean it's it's possible the
that the AIS that take over will just
work out you know Game Theory to be like
ah yes we have like we've just really
aligned these things that are being sent
out and we're just confident that the
successors that they generate will also
be aligned yeah but you know that sounds
like a thing that would be difficult to
us but but a very viable thought process
on this is an advanced civilization will
know that it's impossible to perform
that alignment and so they won't want to
expand in fact you know there's a sort
of structure this Jupiter brain idea
where at a certain point you're you know
the lag of just communicating internally
in your memory and your processing is
large enough to the point that even in a
a single ball of computronium you are
starting to have Rogue States appear
because they are cut off from the main
processing of the rest of the of the
collective so there's kind of like a
really interesting Charles TR wrotes a
great book called accelerando I don't
know if you've read this but the gist of
the argument is that the advanced
civilizations or the you know the
robotic civilizations they don't want to
go out into the universe because the lag
is such a killer but they also don't
want to necessarily open themselves up
to threats from other civilizations that
are willing to accept the lag and you
come into a certain amount of
conflict so I you know but that's all
like science fiction at this
point okay so it sounds like to use
Robin Hanson's chology like we're
basically talking about whether Humanity
or whatever AI takes over after Humanity
Robin Hansen would say that uh he used
the term grabby to mean like expanding
and trying to conquer as many resources
as it can um that's what he calls grabby
as opposed to like non- grabby that can
just like chill on its planet and like
not make a visible signature it sounds
like you're not convinced that the
descendants of planet Earth will become
grabby I think it is possible you know I
sort of describe this as a you know I
don't have a term for it but and there
there have been some papers that have
looked into this that there is a
um sort of
mathematically perfect place to be in
the structure of your civilization and
it does not include expanding outward at
the speed of light that it doesn't that
doesn't get you the benefit that you're
hoping for you get more benefit just by
staying at your home world and
concentrating and thinking your thoughts
and simulating your ancestor or or
whatever it is that you that you want to
do um and so one perfectly reasonable
explanation for why we don't see any
aliens expanding outward at the speed of
light is that that's a bad idea that
everyone who reaches that point will go
oh no that's a terrible idea we
shouldn't do that and one possible
explanation is that you are creating lag
that you are potentially generating uh
competitors so so I think that's an
interesting idea you know I mean I you
know again just a journalist I haven't
sat down and done the math and written
my response paper to Robin Hansen but
but I find these you know I love to let
these ideas Collide in my brain and and
stew
around do you think maybe the ultimate
compromise solution is you still have to
hop around planets right because like
the sun's going to burn out or you know
there could be an asteroid so but you
just like do it together with your whole
civilization and you don't let anybody
go out and start a new civilization well
I I think you know maybe but I think
we're back to okay the thing that makes
sense is now you're starting to
rearrange the Galaxy in ways that are
more in line with the kind of
civilization that you want to have um
there's some really interesting ideas
about how you can Nest super massive
black holes surrounded by other super
massive black holes surrounded by stars
surrounded by planets that you could
actually build a star system with a
million earthlike planets that are
perfectly habitable and yet we could
Traverse this system with the kind of
technology that we have today and so you
can imagine a civilization saying well
let's reduce the lag let's bring the
family together so that's another and
then that would be obvious you would see
these really weird structures out in
space is people attempting to create
these stable um concentrations of
intelligence right right okay um now
let's talk about Dr kipe David Kipping
had a video where he basically wasn't
convinced by grabby aliens and he made
some interesting points uh do you
remember some of his points yeah um so I
mean I think let me let me get your get
your note I um I mean so yeah so there's
a couple right like the one is this idea
that um the one is there's this idea
that that in fact we should be living
around red dwarf stars
not you know yellow star like the sun
and and then actually is starting to
look like red DF stars are pretty
uninhabitable and then that would easily
explain why we don't appear around a red
dwarf star um he a red dwarf basically
same thing as an M dwarf think yeah an M
Dwarf Red Dwarf yeah so the problem with
the red dwarf stars is that I mean they
are the by far the most numerous stars
in the
universe and and so you would expect
like we should not be living around a
star like the sun and those red can burn
for like a trillion years right instead
of just 10 trillion years 10 okay yeah
so they're they're fully convective so
they use up all of the fuel in the
entire star in a way that's very
efficient and and in fact like the go-to
move of a civilization would be to tear
apart their regular you know uh star
like the sun into red dwarfs you can
make 13 red dwarfs out of the Sun and
that would be much more fuel efficient
than letting the sun die in five billion
years turn into 10 trillion years
um so we we should have appeared around
a red DF star and we don't and now it
looks like okay well maybe actually red
dorf stars are are very dangerous and
scour away the atmospheres of any of the
planets that are in orbit around them
and then that would explain that nobody
gets to evolve around redw stars and you
know it's too early but James web this
is a question that the James web Space
Telescope can actually ask so one of the
most famous examples of this is uh the
trapis one system which has uh six
earth-sized worlds orbiting around this
red door star three of them in the
habitable zone and astronomers this was
like the first Target for James Webb to
try and analyze and they've searched the
planets for atmospheres and they've they
found no atmosphere around the first two
planets we're waiting on the results for
the next planet it turns out it's a lot
more difficult to make these
observations than anybody was expecting
and but you know I interview astronomers
all the time and there's some percentage
of them that say it could just be that
all red dwarfs are terrible so that
would explain you know why we're we're
around the kind of star that we
are exactly yeah so my own uh thinking
about this topic my own naive thinking
so when I first heard Robin Hansen I
think he pointed out look there's these
stars that live for more than a trillion
years that they can burn quite a while
if you just kind of let the universe
cook these Stars might be pretty
consistent at cooking life after like a
hundred billion years or something it's
just that there's such a low deadline if
you want to not get conquered in this
region of the universe right like
there's only a billion years left so you
better come up with something on like
some faster lucky Planet otherwise
there's not going to be a chance for
these red dwarves to cook because the
red dwarfes already cooked in like some
other region of the far away Universe uh
and and so that's that's kind of like
one one thing he was froing might happen
but now David Kipping is saying well red
dwarfs Actually I don't even think that
they support life so that shouldn't even
necessarily be part of the theory like
try to come up with a theory without the
assumption that Red Dwarf could support
life I think grabby alien still holds up
because even if it's like okay it has to
be a star more similar to our sun and it
has to happen faster that's still fine
because you still need a way to explain
why we're like the first piece of
popcorn to pop off like this right
instead of like 100 yeah yeah absolutely
I mean I
think you
know you know again back to you know
from my perspective it doesn't matter
right because you know we're the only
place that life was able to the
observational evidence is we are the
only place where there's life in in the
observable universe and so for me again
it doesn't it doesn't really matter
whether you try to sort of uh address it
from a basian side statistical side any
of that right what we see is
Wilderness and so we're alone or
first now when when I watched the David
King's video um you know I I'm
definitely not a cosmology expert but I
do know a thing or two about
epistemology that's more my wheelhouse
and I felt like I might be qualified to
push back just because I noticed him
making pretty basic epistemology
mistakes from my perspective so in
particular I noted that he said it's a
rule of thumb to not invoke aliens to
explain things like okay it's a maybe
it's a rule of thumb but like if there's
enough if there's enough of a good model
like it's okay to invoke aliens it's not
like a crime
yeah yeah I mean a lot of the times it
is I mean it is bordering on a crime and
in the astronomical Community if you try
to you know your first instinct is to
explain something that you don't
understand with it was aliens that is
considered um you know uh it's not on as
they would say in Australia um because
it's essentially you're invoking magic
right you're saying like I don't
understand what the capabilities are of
this alien civilization but you know
they can do anything therefore they can
do that thing they can they can ex you
can explain the the strange observations
from from bajin Star you can explain the
movements of UAM mua you can explain the
uh the strange sightings that have been
found by Navy test pilots aliens can can
do all that and so that the moment you
invoke aliens as an explanation for the
the thing that you're seeing you are way
out on thin ice and you have got two
demons you you have to deliver with
overwhelming evidence that that that is
correct and so I
think I mean I think it's weird to me
though because I don't think that that
Hansen is saying aliens right he's
saying uh he's not saying that we see
aliens he's just saying that that I
don't see any aliens but they are
probably over the cosmic Horizon from
what we can tell today and and I think
Kipping is saying careful in saying
using aliens um but I you know I'm a lot
more aligned with with Kipping I think
you know that you know I've interviewed
him several times and you know I think
we are fairly roughly aligned that it
appears that we live in a in an empty
Universe right I mean I can still in Dr
he's saying like look your theory is
just based on not observing anything so
therefore you make up aliens isn't it
more parsimonious to be like I don't
observe anything and therefore there's
nothing yeah I mean I think I mean the
magic of Hansen's paper is that it tells
you where they might be and how quickly
they're coming and when we should expect
to see them which is fun super fun right
to say okay the the we don't see them
and they're probably moving at the speed
of light therefore they are this far
away and they're moving at this pace and
so on and you know set your watch and
check back in a couple of of years and
maybe we'll see them and and that's
super fun it's super fun but okay so let
me respond to the argument uh of you and
David kiing which is saying like how is
this pulling its aaman weight you know
like aam's razor like why should this be
the preferred Theory compared to the
quote unquote simpler theory of just
like they don't exist right is that
basically the question
no no not exactly I
mean like like I understand the argument
that Hansen is making yeah and and it is
a perfectly
reasonable you know we don't see them
they would be moving at this pace
therefore this is how far away they are
like that's fine right that you could
say we're alone or we're first
or they are Over the Horizon and they
just haven't gotten here yet right
because you're now already getting rid
of all of the other arguments which
which I find very productive that you
know when you look at the explanations
for the firmy Paradox there are dozens
maybe even hundreds of explanations we
live in a cosmic Zoo they're around us
but we can't perceive them uh our our
detection tools just aren't good enough
yet like you can just go through that
list and and this clarifies and
simplifies the argument down to We're
Alone we're first or they haven't gotten
here yet and so I find that really
useful and and yet I don't really feel
like I need to choose between those
because I don't want to yeah okay well
it sounds like the difference between
you and me is that um I feel more of the
pull of like being an ideal basian
Reasoner right so like I try to align
the way I reason about the world to like
the way that a perfectly programmed AI
would and there's just like rules for
when a hypothesis gets to win so in this
case what's happening in the background
that I think a lot of non-asians
wouldn't notice is that Robin Hanson's
Theory grabby aliens it's constraining
how the universe is allowed to be in a
way that makes the probability of our
observations more likely than they are
made by other hypotheses and the rules
of basing inference say that it deserves
credit for that so for example it's
ruling out a possible scenario where you
have grabby aliens but they're but
they're like expanding leisurely it's
basically saying that's not allowed to
happen and I'm like yeah okay I'm happy
with it ruling out that scenario and and
therefore putting more probability on
the current observations and therefore
by the by Bas rule therefore increasing
its own probability like I actually
think that Robin Henson has made uh he
gets epistemological points for what
he's done if aliens exist I agree that
they're moving that if aliens exist I
agree that they fall under the grabby
aliens
model okay yeah I mean that's a that's a
pretty big uh point for Robin Hensen you
I'll take that yeah yeah like like that
that the whole reason why I think that
we're alone in the observable universe
is that we don't see aliens expanding
outward at the speed of light all around
us so so then that is like for me that
is the Bedrock of the thing that we
would expect to see we don't see that so
now the possibility is we don't see that
because they're not there or we don't
see that because they just haven't
gotten here yet either of those are are
fine in my brain and I don't feel the
need to to settle on either one okay
fair enough fair enough all right so
that's grabby aliens and then I also
wanted to hit on
multiverses right yeah so o overall what
what what is your overall thinking on
multiverses or multiple worlds so so I
don't really have an opinion um you know
again sort of as a journalist um you
know what I do is report that there are
different people who have different
opinions of different multiverses but
but the but the reality is is that
there's actually like a whole bunch of
different flavors of what you could
explain by a Multiverse so um you know
one example is that if the universe is
infinite
then and yet there is a finite number of
states that matter can take you could
take say a cubic meter of the universe
and there's I think explained by like 10
the^ of 80 uh Poss possible
configurations that matter could be in
that cubic meter of space but if the
universe is infinite then if you go far
enough away in any direction you're
eventually going to hit a duplication of
that cubic meter of of space and then
you could imagine larger duplications
and larger duplications and the
ramifications of this are that that this
conversation that we're having is
happening an infinite number of times on
an infinite number of other Earths that
we are separated by distance and that's
one possibility of a Multiverse that
really just falls out as a necessity if
we live in an infinite Universe another
possibility is that the universe is
infinite in time and so you know as we
roll the clock forward out into the
universe that various Quantum
fluctuations will cause unlikely things
to happen and one very unlikely thing
that could happen is you know we always
say like the air in your room could
actually probabilistically appear on
Mars and that would be bad for you but
it would be very rare so don't worry
about it but eventually it there's a
chance it could happen and eventually
it's kind of inevitable that it will
happen and so if you run out into deep
time then you could imagine weird things
popping into existence that are
incredibly rare such as a mind capable
of perceiving itself this is this idea
of a boltzman brain but but in fact a
entire planet an entire other big bang
and you know people have calculated the
odds like what it would take for to get
an entire Another Universe and it's it's
not zero and so if we have an infinite
amount of time ahead of us then in fact
we could have other versions of the
universe just appear in time and then
there are other sort of implications
like one of the most
trusted uh theories to explain the
universe is this idea of inflation that
you know you have know Big Bang is
wonderful for explaining the universe
that we find ourselves in but there are
some flaws in the big bang that
astronomers are are deeply aware of and
inflation was a way to overcome those
those weaknesses
and inflation yeah yeah well I mean like
there are some observations that you
make in the universe that that are a
little weird and the way you explain
those is that if the universe went
through this really rapid expansion
process early on then that could explain
away those observ
but you would in order to have that
period of inflation you would need to
have in a sort of larger fabric of the
cosmos ongoing inflation happening at
different rates in some cases inflation
stopped in other places inflation is
continuously ongoing and that each one
of these places where inflation is
happening are essentially separate
universals with different rules and
different um you know different laws of
physics and that happened to be that we
ended up in one where they're possible
to promotee life so you know this is
like the short version um Sean Carroll
has a terrific solo podcast that he did
at one point where he enumerated through
all of the different versions of the
Multiverse and you know if you want sort
of a nice collection to hear them all
then you can um but the problem is just
there isn't any observational evidence
for any of them so until then they exist
in the realm of mathematics right right
have you read Max hegar's book our
mathematical Universe I haven't no it's
from 2015 and I think the ideas are a
few years older than that um I haven't
read Sean Carroll but I read Max tmar
and I thought it was really good really
solid book actually our mathematical
universe and you know Max tagar went on
to co-found a future of Life Institute
with Yan talin I think and they're
really big in the the AI safety space so
small world I guess or small small
intellectual world if people like the
same Stu I mean Sean Sean Carol is a fan
of the many worlds interpretation of
quantum mechanics that you know every
time a decision gets made you end up
with two versions of the universe and
yeah exactly that are the two
paths I'm a big many worlds guy and so
is elazar and so is uh the guy left to
hate on this channel David deuts he's
actually uh he makes a lot of sense on
on many worlds and and he he's actually
great unlike any topic except for uh AI
I mean it's it's you know again you know
going back I'm just a journalist not a
scientist and you know uh I don't really
have any skin in that game um you know
when I took physics we learned the
Copenhagen interpretation of of how it
all
functions yeah of course um but you know
it's a it's a beautiful and elegant
explanation that of you know the way you
explain is you get two universes you
know now everything just makes total
sense except for the fact that you just
made two universes right like like
that's the part that that seems a little
out there but you know doesn't but
because they because they make one of
them go away right it collapses uh no I
mean not necessarily but the the
universe is I mean the universe is
already weird like so don't be surprised
if the universe comes up with weird
stuff to explain its underlying reality
like like if you're waiting for the
universe to make sense too bad we are
already deep into uh you know the
universe does what it want and we don't
really have a lot of control over that
right right right yeah and just uh you
know this topic Multiverse I mean Max
tag Mark really got me noodling about it
you know cuz he there you know there's
like four tag Mark levels um I wrote
them down so teg Mark level one is large
Universe which you talked about it could
be really large in space and time and
like you said it's hard to wrap your
head around but even if you have like a
a 1 meter by 1 meter by 1 meter cube of
space like you just have to go really
far out in space and with like enough
Randomness and you'll just eventually
get like the same Cube or every
variation of that cube of space so you
literally could have like a a Bizarro
Fraser who like very similar to you with
like some small funny tweaks like those
actually would exist if the univers are
just hyp exponentially large right like
10 to the power of 10 to the power of
den like a you a triple stack of
exponentials and hey it's still finite
right uh and then okay tag Mark World 2
different physical constraints right to
like the different parameters like oh
how strong is the electromag force how
many dimensions are there do you have
any thoughts on that model
nope okay it's but it's just like hey
may maybe every possible tweaking of
constant exists and just like don't
support life right yeah as a journalist
I can confirm that people believe people
have evaluated this as a theory right my
goal is to make is to ruin the
neutrality of your journalism Fraser
sure good luck no no I you know I've
expressed opinions non-stop in this in
this conversation about things that I
have no right to express opinions about
yeah me neither me neither uh okay and
then yeah a teag mark level three is
quantum worlds which you mentioned and
then techb level four is kind of
interesting because he just he kind of
goes all the way bites the bullet and he
says all mathematical structures
physically exists in you know whatever
sense that needs it's a little hard to
wrap your head around but he's just like
yeah anytime you can have like a formal
model of of something that uh obeys I
don't know logic or you know set theory
like whatever it is you take math and
there's like some physical reality to it
and our universe is just like one
mathematical structure among many your
thoughts again I have no opinion like
whatever sounds good sure right right
yeah fair enough um yeah I think alaz
owski uses the term reality fluid when
he talks about things like in quantum
theory where he's like I'm not really
sure in what sense this is real but like
I want to keep my eye on it like you
know like the probability like collapse
probabilties is just like maybe this
outcome is getting more reality fluid
like maybe there is sentient life living
in this many world that's bit that's
like long you know it's like highly
unlikely but it still exists in the
space of possible worlds yeah me yeah
for me you you sort of brought you asked
me early on like what do I like and what
I like is the stuff that we have
evidence for that or there's a really
clever way for us to get evidence for
and so you know if somebody proposes an
experiment that is going to finally help
us sort this out whether it's Copenhagen
interpretation or mini worlds I'm all
over that and I don't have a I don't
have a dog in the fight right like I
don't care how this turns out what I'm
excited about is the progress is the
ability for people to you know for just
like our primite brains to come up with
the amazing astounding solutions that we
that we have and you know that part I
find it's very I don't know
dopamine chasing for me that you're like
oh that's so cool I love that and and
that's what I'm looking to sort of sort
of H you know cause in the minds of my
readers and and the people who watch my
stuff yeah the stakes for me are a
little bit different as I remark with
grabby aliens I saw it as kind of like
an epistemology litmus test like if you
can't see why these aliens are pulling
their aaman weight then you're not fit
to be like rational enough to like
there's a little bit of that going on
with the rationalist like if you go back
and read the less wrong sequences from
2007 there's actually a big subsequence
about how written by Al owski about how
Quantum many world is totally true and
you as a good rationalist ought to be
able to see that for for these reasons
so right you're very neutral and you
don't have a dog in the fight I have a
dog in the fight because I'm using it as
an epistemology litmus test yeah I I
mean I think it's really important to
defer to
the the scientific consensus about
things um that should be your first
instinct is to just defer to The Experts
who have spent their time studying this
now this can steer you wrong but just in
general um that's the your safe bet is
to say what do most scientists agree as
true okay it's it's when somebody makes
a compelling argument that that you can
understand that gives you sort of a
crack in the in that sort of acceptance
of the scientific consensus um so you
know with all of that kind of stuff you
know none of these theories have reached
the point where they're starting to
break over into scientific consensus and
so it's just like a bunch of people
wandering around in a cocktail party
discussing interesting ideas and I can I
can sip and enjoy the ideas without
holding them very strongly you know I
let them go you know what is it you know
you hold your ideas you want to hold
your ideas very Loosely right yeah
strong ideas loosely held yeah yeah yeah
yeah yeah exactly yeah so I think it's
you know for me I very easily will take
on an idea and understand the
implications of it and S of run it
forward in my brain and then kind of go
ha neat and then and but
not not holding any deeper implications
I'll go you know more evidence needed so
get back to me when there's more
evidence for that and and yet the stuff
that I find really compelling is this
unfolding narrative as the evidence
builds to a proper explanation for for
what's going on I find that so rewarding
well I agree that with grabby aliens
it's going to be hard to cash that out
into empirical observation within our
lifetimes I will say with Quantum many
worlds I think what they're doing now
you know Quantum Supremacy right the
idea to empirically prove that a quantum
computer can work and beat classical
computers on some problems they're very
close arguably they've already achieved
Quantum Supremacy I don't really buy
that they've achieved it but like in the
next decade or so we might actually have
pretty conclusive empirical proof that
like many worlds are really happening
even though I'm sure some copag will
still be like no they're not
yeah I don't think right I don't think
that gets you mini worlds versus
Copenhagen interpretation it just shows
you that that you can apply quantum
mechanics you know Quantum Supremacy you
know you can you can make a quantum
computer work and it's good at certain
things and bad at other things and it
doesn't necessarily you know that that
the same challenge that people have had
trying to understand quantum mechanics
uh 100 years ago will still exist in
trying to figure out why this computer
does what it does right right yeah they
they'll still insist they you know from
my perspective they'll keep just peing
and stealing from the many worlders
equation but then going and layering on
their own epistemology on it um yeah I
mean okay so so here's what I think is
really important which is that it you
need to be really careful when you adopt
a an sort of a belief on a scientific
method without having done the hard work
yourself that it can feel feel really
satisfying to hear somebody who who is
very knowledgeable about something
explain something to you in a way that
is a little bit more simplified so that
you can go like oh yeah that's good
that's really satisfying I really like
that but the reality is that it's only
when you have put in the groundwork when
you have done gone through all of the
basic level textbooks you've gone
through the more Advan level textbooks
you have learned to do the math as well
as the people who are proposing the
theories that you can take a that you
should even let those
theories rest in your brain and tickle
your your fancy because you are un
you're ill equipped to judge them as
being reasonable or not that you're
falling under the sway of Charisma and I
think you know and I think all of these
things
are you know like obviously doesn't
really matter whether you care about you
know Min world or Copenhagen
interpretation but the reality is is
that if you haven't
done the hard work to get yourself to a
place where you can um replicate the
math look at a paper double check that
they've done a good job then then I
think it's better to step back and go I
don't get it I'm G to wait for the
people who do understand it and I think
that's I think that's really dangerous
you know like I I hear you being excited
about about you know those ideas brought
up in by we e eud I'm trying to think
shortened his name yeah yeah but you
know and he's a brilliant guy and has
thought deeply and has done the math
about about AI risk and and you know
internal versus external alignment and
all this kind of stuff and you know but
is out over skis when he's talking about
the viability of of various theories of
quantum mechanics
Beyond him doing the reading and and
thinking about the thoughts and maybe be
even being influenced by other by other
thinkers and I think it's you know
epistemologically you need to be very
careful about the um where all your
ideas got into your head and why you
give them any kind of credence right
fair enough yeah you know rationalist
you know even though I I like to be
cocky with the stuff but it is also part
of the rationalist Creed to also have
proper humility and be like you said
loosely held right like there always has
to be the trapo I I always basically
have to leave a trapo open where I I
basically invite people look you can
walk to my house you could open the
trapo and and you can like I don't know
find the hidden treasure of like
changing my mind like it has to be there
I can't guard the Trap yeah your your
shortcut is to trust the scientific
consensus right if you want a if if
you're not willing to put in the work to
bring yourself up to the same level of
skill as the people who are proposing
the theories then the shortcut is you
trust the scientific consensus because
there's kind of no middle path right so
so if you're like I like this idea but
it goes against the scientific
consensus then you have to demonstr rate
that you've put in the level of work
that that anyone in the scientific
consensus would look at your work and go
okay yeah no this is legit right you're
then falling under the sway of a
charismatic leader and I think that's
that is dangerous in in and it's just
important to identify you know you just
look through all things fell into the of
a charismatic leader 15 years ago too
far gone maybe so maybe so but I'm just
saying that when you sort of evaluate
these very ideas and you put Credence to
them um unless you've gone and read all
the textbooks and done all the math and
you can replicate the experiments then
the the the power move the the shortcut
is to go with the scientific consensus
until you've decided you know what I'm
going to get to the bottom of this and
then actually put in the work that's all
so I you know I hear you know as you
bring this stuff up I'm happy to
maintain my journalistic uh neutrality
and my uh you know and and not hold any
you know sort of side to any of that
stuff
great okay last stop on the AI Doomer
tour of cosmology obligatory as we got
to talk about uh living in a
simulation so yeah F first question
about that is are ancestor simulations
feasible yeah there it doesn't feel like
there's any reason why as we advance the
capability of our technology that we
won't be able to create you know we've
got the Sims The Sims 2 Sims 4 I can
imagine the Sims N is a very good
simulation and for the the simulates uh
it would feel like they're living in
reality so so it feels like we are
moving along that technological Journey
yeah what do you think of people who
just say like look the universe is so
computationally intensive that it's just
not realistic to make a huge simulation
within the universe and certainly not
multiple levels in the N yeah we have no
idea what Bas reality actually is so so
we don't know whether the
the simulation that is being created has
anything to do with what is the
underlying substrate of the reality
right I think it's it's it's kind of uh
you know you're making a leap to say
oh reality one level down should have
anything to do with the the simulation
that we live in and I don't think that's
you can make that leap I think the each
layer of the simulation could be
completely different it just has to
function yeah I agree with you and
actually maybe should make this a
standard question uh what is your P
simulation right um don't
care okay
yeah yeah like like the argument like
I've heard the argument and it seems
perfectly feasible right that yes we are
developing more and more advanced
technology we are moving to this time
when uh we will be able to create
simulations for beings that that will
from their perspective appear to be
living Liv in a simulated world we will
be able to create more and more of them
the likelihood that we are a simulate as
opposed to the simulator is you know you
know moves to higher and higher levels
of certainty and yet there's no way to
tell the difference uh currently as we
understand like maybe we'll be able to
figure out a way to hack the simulation
and if we do so then we will have some
kind of credence that that is true but
until then living a simulated life is
completely
identical to living a real life and so
just play your life accordingly right
yeah I mean I think I haven't said this
on the show but I think my PE simulation
is probably like 55% obviously it's kind
of hard to nail down what does that even
mean I just think there's like a little
bit more than meets the eye with like
just this one Universe I mean if you if
you put enough multiverses in the
picture you know does that count as
being a simulation I'm not even sure
like if if I'm just living one copy
among many I I don't even know it's hard
to Define but it I just think it's
really funny that a lot of us
rationalists we always grew up as like
you know atheists like highly rational
intelligence's creation and he might be
listening to us right yeah well I mean
it is a scientific question right like
if we build a simulation and we are
actually simulating a universe for
beings then for them to ask themselves
are we living in a simulated universe is
a deeply scientific question and it has
an answer we may choose not to give them
the answer but it does have an answer
and so it's perfectly reasonable for us
to ask the same question but if you
can't find an answer if if there is no
logical path forward to actually gain
any evidence then you have to sort of
leave it as a philosophical
question indeed all right nice uh well
you've been a great sport uh I hit out
all the different cosmology topics I
wanted to ask you about uh anything else
that in your mind as we head into the wp
up no um we're we're just at the solar
maximum of the sun's activity which is
sending a lot of really cool solar
flares towards the Earth and so if
you've never seen an aurora now is a
really good time to be able to go
outside and watch an aurora so uh you
know put an app on your phone that'll
tell you when the next Aurora is going
to come by yeah how do we do that does
it work in a suburb uh no no you know
depending on where you live and
depending how far south you are or I
guess how you know how far away you are
from the pole you're um you know you
need to need to come up with better
plans but if you live you know from
Northern California up if you live in
the middle of Europe north if you live
in uh you know Southern Australia New
Zealand then you can go to places that
have dark skies and be able to see
auroras and they are breathtaking I mean
they're just incredible um so that's you
know there's there's a lot of things
that you can do to connect you to the
night sky that I highly recommend that
people go out and and do you know people
say uh you know what do they say like
touch grass no no see yeah grass yeah no
totally go see the cosmos with your own
eyeballs I think it's really cool that
you can get photons from really really
far away with your eyeballs does sound
like it co experience worth doing the I
mean you can see Andromeda with your own
eyes right and it is two and a half
billion light years away and so when you
think about the fact that the photons
left Andromeda have been traveling for 2
and a half billion years
to arrive at your eyeballs unimpeded is
mindblowing and when we detect the the
the microwave radiation from the cosic
microwave background then that light has
been traveling for uh 13.8 billion years
unimpeded it dodged galaxies it fell in
and out of gravity Wells it was
stretched and yet it arrived at our
detectors and in fact when you turn on
your television in the olden days when
you had a television with a um you know
with an antenna and you would just turn
it to no Channel and you just get snow
some percentage of the random Snow on
your television is coming from the cosic
microwave background radiation that took
13.8 billion years to get to you it's
crazy okay I got to think about this
aora thing I've literally done one
astronomy activity in my life which was
uh earlier this year I dragged my family
out to Vermont to try to get a good view
of the solar eclipse oh good did you see
it yeah we did it was pretty good there
was like a thin cloud in front of it a
thin Cloud I feel like I got 90% of the
eclipse experience yeah yeah I really
looked out I've I've tried to see a
bunch of them and the the one that I saw
this year I was in Dallas and it was
perfect like just oh man nice no CL IDE
yeah it was it was long and it was just
it was and you can see why people chase
these things they're like okay yeah I
want to see more of them the other one
that I recommend is to go watch a rocket
launch so oh man yeah it's really easy
now relative you know if you live in the
US anyway you just go to you fly to
Orlando you drive over to Coco Beach
which is right on the water and you get
a hotel that has a view to Cape
Canaveral and you know a lot of them do
and then you sit drinking my ties while
Rockets are taking off and if you've
never watched a rocket launch it is this
you know when you think about how humans
set foot on the Moon that we are sending
these spacecraft the voyagers Cassini
the spacecraft to other places in the
solar system each one of these had a
rocket launch in them and you know I
watched Cyrus Rex
takeoff which retrieved a sample from an
asteroid and brought it back to Earth
and and it is this visceral feeling when
you watch the rocket take off when you
see the the plume of smoke but you don't
hear the rocket and then this this wave
the sound wave moves across the bay and
hits you in the chest and as this rocket
is taking off you hear the crackling and
the you know and you're like we are
sending our Consciousness out into the
solar system and is going to bring us a
piece of rock home it really connects
you to to where Humanity goes next and I
think that's why you know I find these
topics so so fascinating because it
could turn out so wonderfully but it
could also turn out badly it's up to us
to to pick the right path I love it yeah
I mean it's it's it's literally reaching
for the Stars you know it's like the
frontier it's like some of the greatest
stuff we've done so I feel you there and
I might actually take you up on this
because my family is tentatively going
to go to Florida so I'm actually going
to see if I can uh make this happen yeah
I mean they're launching so many Rockets
out of Cape Canaveral now like three a
week in some cases that you stand a good
chance of seeing a couple of rockets
while you're in you know while the kids
are on the beach making never made that
connection yeah you're right Rockets are
launching more frequently so this is
really like the best time ever to come
see some rockets and just like cape
canaval alone the Kennedy Space Center
is just a mindblowing place like you can
walk beside a Saturn 5 rocket you can
touch a moon rock um you can see the
Vehicle Assembly Building because like
it's not just a museum it is also where
these Rockets are being built it's where
the stuff is actually happening and you
take tours and they drive you around all
the different pads and you see all the
Rockets you see all the hardware and it
what's out there changes on a regular
basis like right now they're they're
they've stacked the new Glenn rocket
which is going to be you know one of the
largest Rockets ever ever built and we
should see a test by the you know hot
fire test
yeah and we should see a an actual
orbital test in before the end of
December so it's really good time yeah
absolutely get better finally huh yeah
it's only been whatever 20 years yeah
it's like like I'm one to judge right
like come on Blue origin work faster
yeah yeah
exactly
yeah so there's lots of ways to make
this stuff connected but you know we I
cover all of the stuff every week on my
channel and you know lots of podcasts
and stuff so if you if if space is your
thing I'm your
guy absolutely is audience everybody go
check out Fraser kee's Channel he
recently did a great interview with
Robin Hansen so I would recommend
starting there if you like my channel
yeah Universe today it's great stuff all
right thanks man thanks for coming