[Music]
welcome to Doom debates today I've got
two special guests Sam kirchmer and reml
Ellen from stop AI it's a new upand
cominging movement the stop AI movement
you guys are making a number of Demands
but in a nutshell you guys want
governments to permanently ban AGI
development correct Plus def tech plans
a bun of stal back supports the
development of these kind of toxic
Technologies so restrictions on compute
things like that and you're getting a
lot of attention for your willingness to
get arrested so we saw this pick of you
guys in handcuffs I think it was only
Sam in handcuffs right correct and this
was in front of open AI San Francisco
office so your organization is pretty
new and you're telling me that there's
also a third co-founder who's Anonymous
is that right correct we we have two
other sort of co-founders one is half
foot in half foot out and the fourth
member if you will is anonymously stay
that
way and you guys have built up a 50
person Discord so far yeah great and how
how are you doing on funding we need a
lot of help with funding we mostly have
a fundme we have a crypto wallet
Kickstarter and a patreon but we've
mostly relied on a few donations on
funding all right so your plan was you
go to the San Francisco open aai
headquarters you stand in front of the
gate and this is like the main entrance
gate so when open AI employees are
trying to just come into the building
you're basically saying you can't come
in and you just kind of moved your body
in front of them where they try to come
in so like technically the door is still
unlocked but you're just physically not
letting them come into their office
correct correct and they were laberg
they couldn't believe that someone would
have the audacity to you know stop them
from trying to build something it's
going to kill us all they just want to
build this thing in peace be left alone
what about the possibility that they
would just go through the back entrance
did you have a plan for that they do
have bunch of other entrances because
they share that office space that
building that they are in is buted we a
bu of other businesses so they have many
different entrances to come and go from
I mean our goal is actually to block all
of them I was arrested for a pirate V
violation we're going to try and block
every entrance so obviously still a
pirate V violation but
no that is actually a way we could stop
the development now as if we walk every
single entrance you made a plan that you
were going to assemble on the spot a
group of people and then you guys would
like divide up responsibility right so
maybe you would get the front entrance
other people would get the back entrance
and the idea was to just physically use
your bodies to block open eye employees
from coming in but you didn't get to the
point where you found somebody else who
wanted to help you so the whole time you
only had your body in front of one
entrance correct
is the stop basically like this is like
the first action to building up to what
you just
said yeah and it's okay so I I'm just I
mean this is kind of interesting right I
mean look you're uh it's it's bold right
I don't know if I would personally take
this approach but right now I'm just in
the mindset of curiosity and I think me
and my viewers just want to know okay so
how did this go down so you put your
body in the front gate the employees
came in did a lot of employees just be
like okay weirdo but then successfully
go around you like is that how a lot of
people came to work that day
yeah more or less you know security did
a good job of ushering people to
different
entrances everyone was pretty simple
there wasn't any sort of fight or
anything but we we didn't really get a
chance to actually try what we were
trying to because I was arrested within
an hour sitting there and to pull off
our plan we really needed a few days we
we needed a few days before getting
arrested and that's what I expected
would happen is I wasn't arrested
previously for 5 hours they left me
along with 5 hours
so you came to open AI on a Tuesday and
your plan was to block the office like
Tuesday Wednesday Thursday and by
Thursday or Friday you just wanted like
multiple people at every entrance you
said you brought food did you bring like
a sleeping bag yeah it was Tuesday and
yes I brought a sleeping bag in a tent
and through for for have the F shag and
someone to help carry more supplies we
were prepared to be there for a while so
open and eye security didn't try to move
you but they called the cops and the
cops came in with a pair of handcuffs is
that right right uh yeah where are you
guys physically based I'm in San
Francisco s San Francisco I'm in Hong
Kong so you didn't have to travel far to
do these protests you're kind of ready
to strike at any time huh well I did
move here to do these protest idea is to
the inst from Seattle
Washington but the idea is basically I
mean Seattle is a tech but the idea is
that anything we do protest wise will
have exponen more of a sort of attention
output if we're here in San Francisco
versus anywhere else us more media
attention more social media tensing all
remold are you going to move to San
Francisco part of me would like to but
unfortunately I have family respons so
I'm kind of stuck here so what I'm
actually doing is running the back end
so I mentioned that I'm part of this
program called a safety Camp we've been
running that program for five years and
we're pivoting in part to supporting
stop aring pause aring projects so what
I'm going to do now with Anonymous
colleagues is start a video campaign to
actually of give background pressure to
support Sam meaning that we'll just
interview lots of people encourage lots
of people to send inidia say why they
think companies like open AI should
actually stop scaling the development of
these of launch everything for every one
models so that's kind of the background
pressure funding things like that that's
something I'll take care of having said
that I I do actually want to be part of
these protests I think it's very
important for co-founders of an activist
organization to actually put the skin in
the game I think it's just the situation
I'm in right now uh I can't do that
right now so here I am actually just
supporting Sam in any way I can cool Sam
I just want to finish playing through
the story here you do the protest the
cops come in they threaten you that
they're going to give you a citation for
uh what were they going to charge you
with again they charged me with um
blocking entrances and I just want to
make clear sort of what our plan is here
so it is a misdem or what I was charged
for but the plan is we're going back and
repeating this action on the 21st of
October and we're just going to keep
going it until we're held on remand
which means held in jail until the trial
date and then when the trial comes the
plan is to lead the necessity defense
basically say that the actions we took
are necessary and just because we're
trying to raise awareness that the
companies are going to kill everyone and
nor take all of our jobs there's been
some success with that in climate
movements you know blocking roads and
entrances to companies and we're hoping
to have the same success what we're not
trying to do is to be popular we're not
trying to be a popular movement this is
not about us kind showing like oh you
know we're just kind of going along with
the law we're just making it easy for
everyone we're actually making it
uncomfortable for other people like
right now the focus is on open AI
employees and the fact that they
continue to work at an organization
that's causing increasing harms and is
willing to risk Extinction but that
means that we're actually I'm
sympathetic to that a high level idea I
just want to say the idea that if you're
currently working on AI you're currently
feeling way too comfortable way too
normalized I'm on the same page as you
guys there right I don't want to comment
on what I think about your exact tactics
right because I I have some conflicts
there I have some potential misgivings
but I want to let you guys say your pece
would be curious to be honest later in a
conversation we can touch upon
it so Sam on September 12th you went to
a secondary open AI office and on
September 24th you went to their main
open a San Francisco headquarters let's
go back to September 12th on the morning
of September 12th you say I'm going to
go to open a I'm going to put caution
tape on the doors but then what actually
happens is you did that for a little bit
and it seems like they didn't care that
much they went around it they used a
different entrance the cops didn't come
and so then you said let's kick it up an
arch let's go into the street and block
traffic correct pretty much I brought D
and John the original plan was to just
do a sit in in
front 153 streets entrance and we we did
actually sort of ation taped their front
doors but that didn't really get out
there I was up very well and then we
kind of got sick of that we were like
let's just go s Street okay so it was
just you two just you two and you get in
the middle of the road near open ai's
office and you just start blocking every
single car even like random cars that
weren't occupied by AI Engineers you
just blocked them anyway yes so a car is
coming in it's driven by a random person
they see that you and John are standing
there are you guys holding like a banner
is it just your bodies in the street
what's going on had a sign that said
stop Ai and we were sitting physically
we're blocking too late to trap we are
blocking North down on dir Street okay
when the cars saw that you were blocking
the road were they able to kind of make
a U-turn or back
away uh most of them tried to like
within inches of us around us a lot of
people were you know admittedly angry at
us and but there were the the rare few
said we support what you're doing and
you know they came up to us and said we
really appreciate what you're doing you
know it was actually by the grace of a
stranger that the picture that went
viral of that protest even got out there
because our photographer left before we
got arrested so the picture that went
viral was actually just thanks to some
stranger that took a picture and he
posted it online okay so Third Street
where open AI is is a reasonably big
street and so you start getting cars
backed up in the direction that you're
protesting is that right and then how
long did that last like a few minutes
before the cops came we were there for
half an hour before the cops handcuffs
and got us out the road it took 5
minutes from when we sat down until the
first cop arrived on a motorcyc and then
it took about another to UNS until we
were finally taken
away so 15 minutes into you guys
blocking traffic a cop comes in a
motorcycle and he's like looks like we
got a situation here I could try to
arrest these guys but that team's
extreme so I'm just going to start
routing traffic around these guys like
I'm going to divert the street that's
what the first cop did pretty much yep
he wanted to wait until a sergeant
showed Sergeant wasn't one to arrest is
it because he felt like he needed backup
to arrest you cuz you guys were two guys
and he didn't know if you were armed or
what what what do you think his thought
process was probably I have no idea what
his thought process was but I think they
just because it was sort of a novel
thing wanted to have their Superior
Final Call whether or not to arrest us
on the spot I I don't
know fascinating so 15 minutes in you
you know traffic starts getting routed
around while he's waiting for his backup
waiting for his Sergeant was there a car
basically waiting for 15 20 25 minutes
before it was able to get through they
were pretty able to get around us they
went right we were basically on the
north side of an intersection and they
just took the Northbound traffic and
turned it right eastbound ah okay okay
interesting now the cop comes on his
motorcycle he redirects traffic around
you guys his Sergeant comes did multiple
other cops come yeah so the first guy
that showed up was on the motorcycle and
then five after more cops showed up ini
there were there's a picture I mean 10
cops were surrounding us just kind of
standing around for the sergeant to show
up Sergeant show were they eating Donuts
take no they weren't eating Donuts but
they were actually they were very
cordial and they did actually say like
yeah you're we get it like you're trying
to prevent terminat and then we said
yeah well the problem with Terminator is
like the Terminator is never going to
miss so your families are all in danger
and if you guys really understood this
issue you'd be sitting here with
us yeah it was a cordial Med so
some person on Twitter took like the
famous viral photo of like 10 cops
standing around us and zooed in on like
the one cop smiling and he said like the
cops can't even believe it's real okay
so you got the 10 cops standing around
some of them totally understand what
you're doing they're being cordial but
ultimately they hit you with three memer
charges right so how did it become three
charges what what were the charges
you're going to have to forgive me here
I'm still talking with the war trying to
thr out what the merges are I mean
they're L not a piece of favorite but
they're just numbers the problem is that
their handwriting is not very clear so I
have to go look in the system one is
basically just blocking traffic the
other one was like hand handling um
which doesn't really make a lot of sense
but they were like oh you're soliciting
something while in the street those are
the only two I know so you said you got
three misdemeanor charges from September
12th and you've got one misdem metor
charge for blocking the entrance on
September
24th if these misdem metor charges keep
piling up what happens what's the next
step you currently have a court date is
that right correct court dates it was
one on October 15th at 9:00 a.m. and one
on October 24th at 9:00 a.m. so Sam when
you go to your court date in a worst
case scenario is there any possibility
of like a year of jail time it's got to
be less than a year right maybe like
weeks months what's the worst case
scenario I think from adding just
preliminary research on be of f yeah it
could be a year or more more I don't
really care what the consquences are
here even if pleading the necessity
offense goes poorly because I I just
think people have to do what we're doing
now like we we are running into
potentially building AGI extremely soon
and once you build that uh you hand over
control and at that point you assure
your future Extinction or everyone's job
gets taken still I mean people who don't
do what we're doing I think Grace the
problem is like we have to stock this
now and if blocking entrances is what
you have to do then that's what we're
going to do even if it results in US
losing I hope we don't and I hope we do
win the necessity defense and we are
basically allowed to continue doing it I
know that's will will happen or not
someone has to do something someone has
to do something
now so just to repeat what I'm hearing
if the judge were to sentence you right
now for let's say 6 months in jail for
your
misdemeanors you would still think that
you did the right thing you played the
right strategy just because it's so
urgent that there's really no choice
correct exactly what about the argument
that like you decided spur of the moment
on September 12th you just told me that
it wasn't even your original plan to
block traffic but blocking traffic is
why you got that misdemeanor so isn't it
kind of weird that you're saying it's
such a great action even when you kind
of thought of it on the spot that's not
quite correct we did have the backup
plan to go sit in the road if we didn't
get enough attention from just walking
entrances that was our backup plan and
we had that original plan in the backup
plan a week or two so it wasn't SP the
moment like the muted sound okay so if
I'm understanding correctly you guys see
yourselves as doing classic Civil
Disobedience just like Martin Luther
King and Gandhi is that right yes some
and it seems like your strategy is going
to work if and only if the jails start
getting piled up with these kind of
activists so you know going to jail is
no problem because it's part part of a
strategy in some sense right
let me try and create a bit of an
overview in terms of how I'm thinking
about this there are multiple points at
which we're activating people to be part
of this and getting people to think
about the risks involved with this AI
corporations continue to develop a so
one is just Sam just standing there say
like guys I'm going to be here
because I care about this and it's
weird that everyone just kind of like
standing around and saying like yeah
I'll just let it happen so Sam's
actually taking that action and people
see it and they're saying like
wait actually I should rethink this
which includes open AI employees I want
to reach out to more open AI employees
for various tactics and this is one of
them so that's step one the other step
is through this we will encourage other
people to join so some people might not
get arrested some people will those
hardcore people who get arrested kind of
act as an example of like I'm willing to
sacrifice some things in my life I'm
willing to get arrested in order to do
this
okay so then there are two things
happening here one is the media gets on
to this the media kind of start sharing
this saying like hey wait what's
happening with these people start
interviewing us we can start talking
more about our concerns we can start
setting demands in terms of what we want
these AI companies to restrict we want
governments do to acts how we can
collaborate together with other citizen
groups to restrict these AI corporations
and the other thing is yes like Sam can
actually go to trial plead the necessity
defense and that's part of that overall
strategy of saying like guy
we're doing this for a reason like Sam
mentioned uh we had a backup plan uh one
week beforehand saying like Okay this is
not a way that we can actually kind of
start kind of raising awareness all
right we'll try a classic Civil
Disobedience tactic which is to to like
block a road and knowing that like we're
going to be in Nuance it's going to be
unpopular we were sorry for the people
who we who we annoyed with that uh but
given the risks given the stakes
involved we really do need to take this
more seriously and we're showing that
we're taking it seriously and we're
getting people to stop paying attention
to this and discussing
this Sam going back to September 12th
when you're in the road the 10 cops are
there did the cops handcuff you yes when
they want to take you to the station so
they can book you there's really no
alternative right they never say like
all right sir get in the car like the
handcuffs are kind of mandatory right I
think it is just for their safety um and
he go into more about what going to show
is like but I also just want to be very
clear we are toally for nonviolence and
we never will turn violent if anyone
does anything violent we will condemn
them and you know our true defining
characteristics of stop AI is we want
permanent stop to the development of AI
and we are non vile and we're trying to
engage US population in our peaceful
protest so our true defining
characteristics are permanent stop and
peaceful civilist be so you're sitting
in the back of a swad car on Third
Street in San Francisco near open AI on
12th and you drive down to the police
station yep and then what happened they
took us to the local Precinct we stayed
in a very cold room the truck tanky will
for about 4 hours and then they put us
in another transport vehicle after about
four hours in that room and took us to
the Sheriff's Office which is sort of
more Mion district and there we were
fingerprinted they sort of did all the
paperwork stuff and then they released
us from that location 4 in the morning
in total we spent about 8 hours in jail
uh after walking thead and and that was
the end and then you just went back home
pretty much yeah actually I don't think
it was like 4:00 a.m. I think it was
about 2: a.m. so I think we actually
spent the whole ordeal was about 10
hours and most of it was just in the
police station and the sheriff's office
right for fascinating as an aside you
got to understand the average person
myself included has never been
handcuffed gone to police station right
we just watch TV and movies right this
is fascinating yeah and and I've had a
very clean criminal record but the point
here is like it doesn't make sense to
protect purity of your criminal record
if we're all going to be dead we have to
do something now and if getting arrested
is a byproduct of stopping it then it's
fine like I I die to stop it so going
back to September 24th your second
protest the cops come because your barri
in the open AI office with your body and
you refuse to stop so once again the
handcuffs come out right
yeah they handcuffed me they're sitting
in front of that gate or no I I thought
they were going to leave me alone for
days both of these times when you're
handcuffed what does the walk to the car
look like are you resisting are you
walking
voluntarily no I mean we're very much
the belief that when it's time to go you
go with the you don't fight them on it
that's do you just stand up and go in
peace we're not trying to make a
statement saying we're fighting these
few cops who it's their job to arrest n
cases like us we're trying to rebel
against the system not the individual c
I'm not trying to fight cops like it's
not my goal what time did your day start
on September 24th it started at about 9
a.m. just getting ready and then we
finally showed up with a friend about 12
I didn't start protest until about 1 and
then got arrested around 2 and then they
take me spart to the precinct about like
2:30 so there was a broke short there
now you'd already been arrested before
so why was the whole process shorter the
second time I think because the offense
was much less severe I was just blocking
an entrance rather than a road and they
said hey we're just going to take you to
the precinct actually when they arrested
me they said all right we're going to
book you in jail but then when I got to
the precinct they were like we're just
going to you out of the back car as long
as you don't as long as you promise to
not go block the same entrance like an
hour from now I was like fine that is
fascinating you got to wonder what kind
of conversations those cops are having
with the kind of people they're letting
out of the back of the car like what
kind of characters do they encounter
where the characters going to like go
back to what they were doing before
that's probably like a common pattern
for them yeah if you live in the US if
you live in a liberal City you're very
aware of the situation with propy doing
Catch and Release types things criminals
so when the cop got you out of the back
of the car you gave the cop your word
that you're not going to do it but why
didn't you go do it I mean according to
your own logic isn't that the kind of
thing you would
do right yeah I mean I would have just
gone back and sat in front of the gate
if I thought that was the most optimal
thing to do but I kind of thought like
maybe we can do a little bit more
organizational work here and put out a
longer notice ahead of time before doing
the next one and then maybe possibly
we'll get just one more person to come
to the next we will for sure get at
least one more person the next and to
add to that like Sim's very honest s
would just say like yeah I'm not going
to be there he's just going to do it and
and that's also something that we're
standing for here we just want to be
transparent about we're doing and why
we're doing it and this is the case of
like yeah sure we would do that in an
hour's time all right I mean that's that
is consistent with what I think of a
civil disobedience so I understand when
the cop let you out of the back of the
car at that point we're talking it was
like 5:00 pm. 6 p.m. on September 24th I
started protesting around 1 and the cops
showed up at two and they drove me the
precinct there like 2:30 so I was out on
my on the street at
2:30ish wow okay so the whole process
with the cop was like under an hour
right yeah yeah it was very quick on the
was it a single cop how many cops were
you interfacing with uh there were two
cops in on 24th it was a lady and an
Irish guy so they didn't feel like they
need back up cuz they're like yeah just
one guy in front of the open AI office
he's not blocking traffic we'll just
take him and again like they were very
you know polite and I think facts and F
threat what's it like when you're
refusing to cooperate and then they want
to arrest you what is that interaction
like where they like all right well
we're going to need you to put these on
like is the or do they have to like you
know hold you down how does the
handcuffing work no it's all it's all
very procedual like they first offer to
just give you a citation if you're
willing to get up and do your protest in
a way that's not blocking traffic or
flow of pedestrians you're not willing
to do that then they say okay we're
going to give you another warning
sometimes they don't give you that
second warning but then they if you
refuse warnings then they say okay we're
now going to arrest you at that point
they just tell you to either stand up
they stand you up either semi for should
we or have you stand up on your own and
then they just tell you to turn around
and they put the handcuffs on you and by
forcibly I mean like they're very gentle
they're not close
hand if you were to try to resist I
guess you never did but at that point
does the taser come out do you happen to
know what they do again like I'm not
trying to fight cop
heretical and oh we and we as an
organization are all about just going in
PE when the time cops it's not our goal
if if someone got tased in s ey it
because they're being in it and they're
not going in peace when the tag it comes
to AR resting okay so that was all a
week ago what's next what's the next
step the next step is we're going to do
a repeated bar fade sit in and fr of the
same location company On's office at 575
cor Street on October 21st at 12:00 p.m.
no uh and anyone who wants to come is
welcome to you don't have to actually
get arrested you'll most likely be given
a citation if you sit in front of the
gate and actually walk TR want to get
arrested and and I'm actually urge you
to just out of moral stance you do not
have to get AR and just block the gate
with us on the 21st is there any chance
that the cops will have a different
attitude and they'll be like you know
what we are going to review video
footage and we actually are going to
sight and even charge with a mom meter
anybody who is blocking the gate at any
time that is very possible you know
we're dealing with unknowns here so that
can happen and you know it's very
important to help be and just be honest
is transparent with people so we're not
you know subjecting them to some level
Rich they are okay with that being said
bingly I think getting arrested is
nothing if we're all going to die um and
I think K doesn't believe that is
crazy
but I'm not trying to lure people into
getting arrested know for certain that
there is a chance you could get a miss
here yeah I mean San Francisco cops as
you say are known for being quite gentle
relative to cops in other cities so it
does seem likely that they're going to
give everybody the opportunity to kind
of scatter and stop walking the gate and
they're only going to arrest the
hardcore people like you who insist on
following through with the civil
disobedience is that a good guess I
think that's F on yeah what would you
say to somebody who wants to join your
protest who they want to take it even
farther than you and they're like you
know what I do want to resist when the
cops arrest me what would you say to
that person well we're we're trying to
do training to prevent that from
happening and in general I can kind of
get the sense from someone if they would
do that prior like I said that does
happen it's because that person failed
to listen to our directions so Monday
October 21st at noon in front of the
same open AI office that you went to the
second time on September 24th correct
correct this is when we're doing our
next barricade yeah this next barricade
that you're planning how many RSVPs have
you got so
far this we one is it just yourself for
an additional plus one oh no it's me
plus another person for this next event
who's the other person his name greo r I
think cool okay yeah I've seen him on
Twitter he does seem supportive of what
you guys are doing so you've got your
October 21st protest you've got all
these charges getting racked up you've
got all these court dates coming
presumably you're going to eventually
get more and more jail time so you're
basically creating a very high
probability situation that you're going
to be in jail in a couple months correct
yeah so after doing this next barade on
October 21st at 12:00 p.m. once we're
released from during that varic date we
will then go continue to block the date
and then will be arrested and probably
taken back to the precinct be released
get out do it again and we're going to
continue doing it until we're held on
remand which basically just means you're
held in jail until the trial date and
then once the trial comes we then plan
to P the necessity if you're held in
Rand can you get out on bail cforia is
cous bail system
I think the whole point of being fellow
man is that they say like I'm G hold you
until the trial day I might be wrong if
the judge hears that this is your plan
then even if there's only like two
misdemeanors don't you think the judge
will be like well let me skip to the end
and give you the time now well that's if
you lose the necess defense if that's
the case then to be honest that's the
risk Rule and take are you okay with me
publishing a podcast saying that you
plan to repeat this offense again and
again because couldn't this be used as
evidence against you in your trial no
we're going to announce it by the time
this is released we'll already have
announced that we plan to do the
repeated sit in starting first so you
you releasing your podcast is not an
issue let's think a little bigger let's
say a couple months pass and you're
sitting in jail for 6
months what do you hope happens next
hope we're let out and we continue in
barricades and theual tension generated
from the trials and I hope a lot of
people repeat what we do on their own I
sort of do like anarchistic these de
centralized organizational structure
where people just decide actions
themselves so we got these dictatorial
institutions these AI companies with
some leaders on top like Sam Alman and
there's people supporting them so there
are AI capability researchers there are
also a safety researchers frankly who
while meaning well are in fact kind of
like putting like a safety sticker on
things kind making it look like the
company still serious about safety I
think it's time for people to just admit
that where this companies for and where
other companies are heading for is is
just going to increasingly destabilize
your Society until it's actually going
to cause it a catastrophe or Worse
that's what we're headit for and if
you're going to take part in that you're
merly cable and this is one of the
things that I think we wanted to tget
here is is that these corporations need
to be restricted people leaving from the
inside people whistleblowing from the
inside and also more public pressure
from the outside more regulation more
lawsuits uh more people targeting the
various harms that these companies
already
causing here's what I'm wondering about
strategy why not take an incremental
step by doing protests like it seems
like what let me ask you it this way if
there were a lot of posi protest
happening if a typical P protest was
like 20,000 people in the streets and
you guys came in and you said you know
what we got to kick it up a notch we got
to start getting arrested we got to
start filling up the jails we got to do
real Civil Disobedience I'd be like okay
yeah let's ratchet it up sure but the P
protest the flagship P protests are only
like 40 people right so why not first
focus on getting 10,000 people in the
streets legally and then if the message
still isn't received then you take it up
a notch right isn't that a more natural
progression because we don't have time
that's the problem here we have
extremely short time ones I helped
organize BR protest in of open eye I've
been in San Francisco now for four
months and I asked a lot of normal
people you know who P ey is and no one
does even though P had NBC cameras at
their last proest and if you asked who
are black lives matter or who is f
Palestine or if you're in the UK who sh
up oil those normal people will be able
to tell you who those groups are because
those groups do Civil Disobedience yeah
it would be IDE to start with what if
stop
AI yeah I mean no right tiny we haven't
had enough time to build that up yet
like it it is it is ideal to to start
with a large traditional protest base
and build up to experience we just don't
have F and I think we can get to where
we want to be by stiffing the protest
step and we actually have done an old
protest we did one in front of
Microsoft's headquarters Seattle but
three let me see if I can follow your
logic you're basically saying hey look
more people know about black lives
matter matter and just stop oil than
about puse AI well black lives matter
and just stop oil they sometimes use
illegal tactics like blocking traffic so
that makes me want to use illegal
tactics but hold on a second isn't the
difference between paii and those other
protests isn't it also a difference that
those other protests have way more
people maybe you should focus on that
difference right we should take a look
at how those groups started so if you
look at for example Extinction rebellion
and might how just all kind of float out
of that
it was admittedly Exile was already
extion rebellion was already a lar of
movement but the people coming out of
that were relatively small they were
just saying like yeah guys we're being
too weak about this we need to actually
take actions in line with what we care
about in line with that but there's this
Max mass extinction that's has being
caused by these
companies um so we're going to take
these actions so of course that's going
to start out small and like that's
happened in other places as well often
these things start at kind of local
Grassroots level with a few people like
a few people kind of working together
and then we're on podcasts like yours
and like read interviews and having
those conversations until more people
join so it's just part of the process I
mean part of me would like what you're
saying to be the case but I I don't
quite think it works that way I I wish
it was the case I I truly do wish it was
the case if we had time to build a
traditional
protest we just don't that's that's the
issue if there's a chance that AGI could
be here within 3 years or a year even we
have to do everything we possibly can
now to stop that with the small number
of people we have if you get to the
point where you consistently have 10
people going to your protests and
getting arrested because they're
following through the Civil Disobedience
and it could even be 10 new people each
time cuz maybe the police starts getting
really St for them so you you kind of
need 10 new fresh protesters each time
to get arrested and keep the funnel
going
if you get to that point do you feel
like the impact is going to be really
big or it's still barely going to move
the needle at that point and you need it
to be like a 100,00 people what's your
sense if if we can build up a situation
like you're describing and we can
actually block indefinitely every
entrance at one aiany like company I
that would be huge I think that would
international news coverage that would
be a fantastic source of advertising for
us and then we just get more people like
and then we may be able to attainer and
goal of blocking every single entrance
at every a a i and that's instrumental
way we could actually stop the
development of AI and including the data
centers like obviously if you don't
block the data centers people just work
oh you have to block data centers
too how do you decide to always Target
open AI instead of meta or anthropic or
Nvidia we're just starting with one
company and this happen company that's
fleeing quote unquote so we're setting
an example what is success for you what
are your demands to stop all of this uh
barricading uh the demand is to
permanently ban the development human
leveli also known as artificial general
intelligence or AGI I just want to note
that bremel has an issue with terms
human leveli for a ethics reasons but
we're trying to permanently development
of thegi in every country we can get
into sort of the details of flop limits
or our plan or goal is to engage 3.5% of
the US population the peaceful protests
and then every country after that are
you demanding to roll back any existing
AI such as GPT 4 or what existing
progress would you allow us to
keep so this is sort of getting into the
flock limits discussion basically we
want to permanently destroy anything
with capabilities equivalent to Orum GPT
4 so that's 10 to the 25 flocks and then
transition to a 10 to the 12 flock limit
which is roughly in capabilities
equivalent to IBM Watson in 2011 a lot
of people think that's a drastic drop
but we want that because if you just
Cube it at 10 to the 25 very soon you're
going to get to a point where we could
build something general purpose or AGI
with that BL cap okay so if I just want
to ask a question to help me with like a
plumbing issue or you know a doctor's
consultation or a legal question you're
saying I should have to go back to GB
3.5 basically uh no a lot less than gb2
so there's a little bit of a discrepancy
here like we want to permanently ban the
dev of anything that's used more than 10
to the 25 blocks for training but to run
that actual model it takes a lot less
compute map like it takes most of the
compu is taking up training process
actually running something like gp4
doesn't take that much compute but
training more powerful models that's
where all compute is the more important
thing is to prevent training of larger
mods it's less important right now that
we like scrap the internet for every
copy at you before it's more important
that we just stop the development
something more power and just to add to
that we are actually against the use of
deep Technologies in the sense that like
many of these models are being used to
spread disinformation and defects and
like that that is on the path of like
disrupting coordination in society kind
of giving these this technology
influence that we would not want to come
hand over to tools that could be misused
by corporations and other actors so this
is also part of it we're being quite
strict here like we're not saying like
Okay people like we understand that
something like bt4 can be nice to play
around with image generators can be fun
to play around with but we're just like
we're already seeing a bunch of problems
with these Technologies and I think we
should just set the safety margin the
way it should be set for something that
could potentially at some point cause an
Extinction so we're just saying like
yeah sorry we understand that you like
playing around with this technology we
like we know that you get it but you
enjoy it but unfortunately we just need
to be mature about this and this is not
going to work out the way things are
heading right
now do you see a distinction between
blocking traffic versus barricading an
AI company's office because when you
barricade an AI company's office you're
implementing your policy agenda in a
vigilante way right but you're getting
what you want you're disrupting AI
development but when you block traffic
you are creating problems for other
members of society that are unrelated to
your policy goal right so do you see a
distinction
there so there is a big distinction and
I truly wish we didn't have to block
traffic and we won't if we don't have
absolutely have to in the future but
blocking traffic actually does a benefit
and that it does raise awareness and
that is our end goal or one of that's
one of our instrumental goals to achieve
our end goal or terminal goal if you all
we we need this is really an advertising
the general public shown the bulls
actually wants a staff 63% of Americans
want Regulators to permanently ban AI
superintelligence so our issue is less
of an education issue and more of an
advertising issue we need forms of
advertisement to get out to the general
public and show them hey we exist if
you're mad about AI don't protest with
us so walking roads is a really good
form of
advertisement I'll just give you my two
cents I'll tell you where I stand I
think Civil Disobedience can be a good
tactic and it can be a moral tactic I do
support what Martin Luther King did and
what Gandhi did and I think that when
you guys are barricading open ai's
Office without creating violence and
without creating harm other than the
harm that you specifically want to
create which is you know harm to people
who are benefiting from open ai's
existence when you think that open AI
should be illegal that's the type of
harm that's like classic Civil
Disobedience right like when
African-Americans like went into a diner
and they weren't supposed to be served
but they just insisted on getting served
you could argue well they're harming the
white people around them who don't want
them to be served but that's like that's
their goal right so the type of harm is
consistent with the policy goal I have a
lot of respect for that tactic my only
issue is that I think the tradeoffs
right now look unattractive like I just
don't think you're going to get that
much impact of implementing your policy
goal just to do these like one-off uh
Civil Disobedience like getting yourself
arrested when it's a small number of
people I think if you spend the same
energy doing puse AI protests you'll
have a lot more time out of jail so you
can keep helping with the protests and
you'll end up having a bigger net impact
for
now the problem is the p a protests
don't attention and they don't produce I
would love it if we had time to do what
subrise movement did and take things
slow and do and just do bad things to
bad the we don't have time we have to do
whatever will achieve the greatest
change in the shortest period of time
first of all doing bad things to bad
people like walking entrances is just a
guaranteed good thing all around because
it's the word out there it also May me
necessary to step things up and and do
things like walking roads even though it
will piss people off but it will get the
attention out there that we need to
achieve a stop in a very short period of
time because we have to get the general
public aware of us existing now okay
I've said my piece that I don't think
blocking traffic is a good way to get
your message across and I don't feel
good about the ROI of doing the other
types of protests uh you know like the
the barricading but I have a lot more
respect for the barricading so I've said
my piece so with that I want to give you
guys the last word you can go ahead and
make your pitch to The viewers and use
my platform to recruit if you want as
long as you can convince the viewers so
go for it thanks Don yeah we're going to
have another barricade protest here on
October 21st in front of 575 quarter
Street at 12:00 p.m. anyone who wants to
come just welcome to join just know
there is a risk that you could get
arrested in charge of the
misdemeanor just know that risk is there
we also want people know that your
criminal record doesn't matter for all
dead and we could be debt here very soon
or hand over control which would ensure
a future Extinction and that could
happen very short
if you want to help but you're not
willing to protest you can help us by
donating or doing sort of other things
that we need done and to know what those
things are and to sign up to do them you
can go to
www.so.org
to protests we have a donate page which
we could really use help with there's a
GoFundMe and um some other ways to
donate on there you can follow us on all
socials at St ainfo we're mostly on X at
the moment it's about it oh we we're
also going to be doing a by briefly
whereby meetings where you can come talk
about how you want to help us and sort
of what our plan is to plan the next
action and for those people who cannot
join a protest right now like I happen
to be in a situation like that there are
other ways you can contribute I mean for
one there are other communities besides
stop po trying to restrict these AI
companies I'm happy to point good
pointers there uh but you for example
we're going to run project at a safety
Camp which is program that I also run to
just start a video app Campaign which
supports the protests where people just
say like giving their personal reasons
why they think AI needs to be stopped so
that that's you can for example join the
work on the video campaign particularly
we need editors we need people are good
kind of reaching out to celebrities
things like that you can even decide to
submit your own project to AI safety
Camp um if you think there's some other
way to restrict AI corporations if you
agree with Lon but you think hey there's
some other way to go about this uh the
way I'm looking at this we need many
different communities approaching this
from different angles and trying to
restrict these AI cooperations from
different angles making it harder for
those AI cooperations to kind of
maneuver around and keep trying to find
wayte to extract profit and on people so
that's another option can join us with
the video act compaining work or you can
even submit your own project at air
safety Camp which is a separate
organization I co-run great well thanks
guys here on Doom debates I often give
people respect when they show that they
have the courage and conviction to
debate their View and Sam you've proven
that you have the courage and conviction
to get arrested and go to jail for your
view so I got to say that is impressive
I've said which parts I agree and
disagree with right I don't agree 100%
but I got to respect a guy who's shown
the courage of his convictions so it's
been a pleasure to have you guys on and
I wish you guys the best with your
movement thank you thank you very much
for having us