the difference between human
intelligence and ape intelligence
appears to me very significant right
like culture and science is not going to
teach a present-day ape to be a useful
scientific contributor is that fair to
say no actually that is if okay if Apes
had had culture then they could have
done science that is it was culture that
made us be able to do culture is
capacity
for humans or whoever to attend to the
behavior of others
figure out the relevant things to
copy and then actually successfully copy
them that is what culture is and that's
the thing that we have that Apes don't I
don't know Robin have you ever heard the
phrase monkey see monkey do it sounds
like that fits your definition of
monkeys having
culture culture is the capacity
behavior of
others figure out the relevant things to
the thing that we have that Apes don't
this is pretty surprising Robin thinks
Apes just need to be able to copy one
another better and then they'd get
exponential economic growth the way
humans have had I don't get how Apes
that are really good at copying each
other give you ape scientists if you
have an ape who can copy human
physicists really well can that ape
invent the theory of relativity I don't
get why robin is so hesitant to invoke
the concept of doing General cognitive
work having a certain degree of general
intelligence doing optimization work on
an arbitrary domain there's obviously
more to it than making Apes better at
copying I got to replay you what Robin
said about culture for a third time
before we move on culture is capacity
for humans or whoever to
attend to the behavior of
okay and do you think that in some sense
most of the Delta of of Effectiveness in
going from the ape brain to the human
brain is increased capacity to absorb
culture do you feel like that's like the
key
Dimension it's not clear that a brain
one quarter the size of a human brain
couldn't have done it as well but there
were a number of particular features the
brain had to have in order to be able to
support culture and that was the human
superpower once you had that first set
of features that could support culture
then we could use culture to collect
lots and lots more features that enabled
us to take off compared to the other
animals okay it seems like I'm pointing
out a mystery that I'm not sure if you
agree like the mystery of why natural
selection cared so much to make the
human head and brain as big as possible
like do you agree that there's something
that calls out for explation there
definitely like brains were valuable so
clearly at that point in evolution
clearly Evolution was going can I make
get a bigger brain here that looks like
a good deal let's figure out how I can
get a bigger brain I don't reach the
limitations like this can't get a bigger
brain but clearly plausibly bigger
brains be valuable it sounds like you're
saying okay you got culture you don't
need that much bigger of a brain for
culture we've got culture nailed down so
why do you think the brain kept trying
to get
bigger I mean a standard social brain
hypothesis is that um you know we
had a complicated social world and there
were large returns to more clever
analysis of our social strategic
situations and that doesn't seem
terribly wrong but brains also probably
let us use culture and uh take advantage
of it more so there's just lots of ways
brains are good so this incredibly
valuable thing Robin thinks big brains
do is clever analysis of our social
strategic situations his words clever
analysis is there anything else we might
use clever analysis for besides our
social strategic situations something
that confers a fitness advantage how
about using clever analysis to design a
better tool instead of just copying a
tool you've already seen this clever
analysis power that you think
potentially three4 of the human brain is
for why isn't that the key explanatory
factor in human success why do you only
want to say that culture is the key as
in the capacity to copy others well