I'm anti- aai because I think we're
about to enter this uncontrollable
Extinction scenario but until we get
there I think life is going to be
amazing I am actually more bullish on
how good life is going to be than almost
anybody right before it all goes
downhill good explaining a society where
where potentially there's cures for lots
of things you're explaining Society
where we're able to do all kinds of
energy development where we don't that
could happen as long as the AI is value
aligned but the problem is the small
disalignment between what the AI wants
and what Humanity wants blows up into a
scenario that you cannot undo so if you
don't get the initial conditions right
there's no undo what do you think is the
mental skill that human brains can do
that AI will never do even if you
extrapolate forward 10 or 20 or 50 years
what do you think is our sustainable
Advantage we have emotions we care so
you think emotions are going to give us
an economic role and AI will never have
emotions and because of that humans can
get paid uh AI does not have emotion it
does not care about anything it just to
follow the algorithm and the rules I
mean what if it simulated a human brain
neuron for neuron then wouldn't it feel
human emotion what would a super like
human or super like computer or like
super AI look like to you out of
curiosity what could it do that we
couldn't like do you have like some
concrete examples the best example is
just what the smartest people in the
year 2024 can do that people in the year
1,000 just think is complete magic is a
complete miracle I mean if you watch a
SpaceX Starship Rocket taking off it's a
skyscraper taking off that's arguably
more impressive than a lot of the
Miracles in the Bible right and yet we
as as a modern human race are able to
pull that stuff off if you extrapolate
the pattern and you say what does the
civilization of the year 3000 do that'll
get your creative juices flowing and
everything we've said in this
conversation when we talk about oh my
God the economy jobs is going to create
income inequality you got to think
bigger than that you got to think about
events that are discontinuous like the
first nuclear bomb the first time that a
single button could kill 100 million
people or an Extinction event where 96 %
of life on Earth just suddenly died
because of a super volcano events like
that happen and I think AI is one such
event there's a reason why the world is
currently full of thousands of nukes and
not a single effective nuclear weapon
defense system attack is full of like
tur wind turbines powered by like
nuclear energy as well right am I wrong
like we can also use it for yeah we're
using nuclear nuclear energy for a lot
of good things using nuclear energy but
the the nuke trumps everything right if
somebody uses a nuke there's no defense
the reason why there's no nuclear war is
because it's mutual destruction so we're
not going to use it they're yeah but
that's not a robust reason right I mean
there's been close calls all over it's
barely working and now you're
introducing a harder problem you're
saying here's the thing that's barely
working let's do another version of the
nuclear problem except this time there's
profit to everybody who works on it but
humans will evolve too like again you're
looking at like okay AI is going to
evolve as if humans are just going to
stay still like you're familiar with
neuralink I'll just give you that one
example like there's a potential chance
that the humans of the future will have
been able to converge with the AI in
some way or or develop a a significant
kind of of like symbiotic relationship
with AI that you you can't even fathom
right now there's a chance that's not
where we're headed that's not where
we're headed though and we only have
already they're already started doing
the first testing phase they already
start putting but if you ask the
researchers the researchers themselves
will tell you ask any researchers
they'll all tell you that the AI that we
don't know how to control is about to
come online and all the other AIS that
have more hope are way behind that's
what's happening right now listen to
what the AI labs are saying this is the
craziest thing to me go to open's
website one of the leading AI labs they
will explicitly say hey we're working AI
as fast as we can within 10 years there
will be an AI That's as powerful as a
human CEO we don't know how to make that
aligned yet this is the actual
state-of-the-art from the AI labs are
saying hey we're really excited about
working on this and by the way we don't
know how to make it friendly to humans
but it's really exciting closing
statements from each side the benefits I
think still greatly ultimately outweigh
the negatives and I hope you guys see
that
[Music]