optimization and the intelligence
explosion boy this one is a tour to
force because it ties together a few
Concepts that I think are so profound
and so underappreciated even in the
discourse today when everybody's excited
about AGI I think so few people are
grasping these basic building blocks
that you can see elezar bring up again
and again in different posts and tie
together and these are kind of key to
his mental model and key to the
discrepancy between the doomers and
everybody else it seems like uh so
optimization processes what are we
talking about it's basically hitting an
improbable Target relative to your
preference ordering so if I want to
build myself a vehicle if I just smash a
bunch of atoms together I'm just not
going to get a good vehicle right it's
not going to have a high speed it's not
going to get me where I need to go it's
going to be low in my preference
ordering but if I build a car you know
how did I find that car how did I get
there in concept space right it it took
an optimization process to get there
some sort of process some sort of
algorith
that's able to search this complex
combinatorial space of physical designs
and get something that has the criteria
that it can transport me quickly
comfortably to where I need to go right
so my brain would be an optimization
process with respect to the problem of
efficient
Transportation okay so we all know human
brains are an optimization process
that's fine what's the point of this
definition well if you look at Natural
Selection right the process that builds
animals
it's the same type of process it's also
an optimization process so there's a
deep connection on the level of the
abstraction of an optimization process
that you can say not only is the human
brain an optimization process but our
creator Our God natural selection the
thing that built the animals it was
actually optimizing the animals and the
plants for the criteria of inclusive
genetic fitness so just like our
preference might be get me from A to B
comfortably Natural Selections quote
unquote preference the targeted trying
to hit is genes that are good at
reproducing themselves and increasing
their frequency in the population right
and that's a non-trivial optimization
challenge right if I show you some
animal and I'm like improve that
animal's genes so that their genes are
better at getting to reproduction right
survival and reproduction and increasing
frequencies uh you know it takes
intelligence to do that and or at least
by definition it's going to take
optimization right you can't just
randomly mutate them right mutation's
not going to do the job you also need
natural selection natural selection is a
way to select on the genes based on
which ones work right it's a process of
scaled up trial and error combined with
mutation and it's kind of a dumb process
and yet with sufficient scale it does
the job of optimization and it's smarter
than a lot of things right so there's a
lot of animals that uh you know like a
beaver it can build a dam but it can't
optimize somebody's genes so the fact
that natural section is able to go
around optimizing our genes it's pretty
impressive right and and even
creationists right there's that argument
the blind watchmaker argument like hey I
pick up a watch I can tell that that
watch is designed hey I look at a bird I
can tell that the wing is designed for
flying okay it's not designed but it's
optimized right so the creationists were
correct to notice that something about a
wing is different from something about a
rock wing and a rock is very different
it's clear that the wing only exists
because it flies right there's there's
no other way to explain the wing I mean
you can go really low down to the level
of atoms but you're missing something
very important about the wing so
similarly to the watch like when you
pick up a watch on a desert island you
really can conclude that if it wasn't
designed at least there was some
optimization process right that's like a
legitimate Insight okay so the concept
of optimization process is letting us
make a deep connection between the human
brain and natural selection and it's
also you can include animal brains as
optimizers too right I mentioned a
beaver so a beaver can in fact optimize
a dam design it can't really optimize
Transportation design I don't think
beaver really build themselves rafts
they don't build airplanes so we can
start to compare and contrast different
optimization processes and there aren't
that many of them in the world you've
pretty much just got animal brains human
brains natural selection and now you've
got human software right and that's
pretty much it like there's not that
many optimization processes okay let's
look at how powerful different
optimization processes are the thing to
note about natural selection is that
while it is an optimization process
itself it wasn't produced by an
optimization process it was bootstrapped
right so natural selection only began by
a coincidence because passive processes
spit out the first replicator right it
could have been like a cycle of
chemicals like RNA molecules uh you know
precursors to cells whatever it was
there was something that was able to
mutate and be selected on which then
bootstrapped the entire process of
evolution by a natural selection uh but
natural selection was not built it was
not optimized it just kind of plopped
into existence the same way that the
first replicators just kind of plopped
into existence right very bootstrapped
very uh low grade right very dumb
processes here uh now over the years
natural selection has had a few upgrades
uh as more organisms got built as more
DNA designs got built it opened up
different regions of the space to search
from right because natural selection is
kind of a gradient descent so the more
places you wander the more niches you
hit the more genotypes you have the more
it opens the door to wander more right
so you can um you can build up
optimization that way um the invention
of DNA separated from proteins and RNA
so now you have a more uh abstracted
encapsulated layer that you can do the
optimization on so that can make the
process of uh evolution by natural
selection more efficient take less time
uh and then you have sexual
recombination right so you've got more
mutation in natural section per
generation and that's pretty much it
those are pretty much the only upgrades
that we've had to Natural Selection so
at the end of the day here in in 2024
natural selection is still pretty dumb
right like it can't look ahead and ask
what would happen if I do multiple
mutations at once it kind of has to get
lucky and try them all right and that's
why it gets stuck in local Optima right
so if you've ever seen like if you look
at the design of the human eye there's
like that nerve cable that basically is
installed backwards right where I think
the nerve comes out of the retina and
then goes back in the retina and creates
a blind spot like completely insane
design right but natural selection is
just forever going to be too stupid to
realize that there's an obvious
optimization to that design whereas if
you use a human brain you can look at
the design and you can be like oh okay
that is a design mistake we can do
better right so natural selection is
it's okay but it's pretty dumb and
humans are basically smarter we just
haven't had as much time to do the
optimization we haven't had as much
scale yet okay so natural section was
bootstrapped um now if you look at the
animals animals have always been targets
of optimization so they are themselves
optim imized but they are also not very
good optimizers right they lack
generality as optimizers whereas natural
selection it does have generality
because it works using physical
consequentialism it plays out the
consequences of all of its designs so
anything that can physically happen is
something that natural selection can
quote unquote reason about it can be
part of the feedback loop of natural
selection because physics will play it
out and it can decide whether the
organism lives or dies and so it can
make it into the Next Generation it can
produce information basically about
about whether any design is good whereas
like a beaver is not going to be able to
evaluate different damn designs you know
it's not going to be able to say Hey
what if I you know add wings to the dam
like the beaver just doesn't operate
like that right it it uses algorithms
that are just like pretty dumb they're
not like fully General Searchers of the
space of possible Dam designs um so
natural section has a generality
property that animal brains don't tend
to have uh and then also natural section
has cumulativity it's cumulative when it
builds up so when it builds up a gene it
doesn't have to create the gene again
from scratch it kind of saves its work
with each generation right now there's
plenty of Gene designs in history that
have been forgotten but today we have a
big library of genes that are still
around that it can work from so that's
pretty good cumulativity all right so
that's natural selection it has
generality has cumulativity um and we
can look at the human brain the human
brain also has generality we can pretty
much think about anything or at least
anything natural section can think about
but we can think about anything in the
domain of physics we can even make up
hypothetical universes we're Turing
complete so it seems like humans are
fully General uh humans have
cumulativity because language culture we
can now we have writing so we're very
much competitive with natural selection
right we just haven't had enough time
but we also share a fundamental weakness
that natural selection has which is the
distinction uh between like kernel mode
and user mode right so you know we can't
directly optimize ourselves we can only
uh optimize upon other things this same
way that natural selection doesn't
really naturally select natural
selection it doesn't really build
natural selection um it it doesn't say
how do I make another process that's
going to make genes fitter better than I
can it doesn't think that way um humans
can potentially say how do we make
something better than humans but that
would kind of kick off the next phase
that wouldn't really be humans anymore
that's what we're doing now with AI
we're saying hey let's just build a
different optimization engine um but
that is going to be fundamentally
different from us because it's going to
be ble to optimize itself it's going to
be the first time that you have an
optimization process that it was
optimized itself and it can optimize
other things and there's not really a
distinction between uh kernel mode and
user mode right there's not a protected
level like humans for all the optimizing
we do we're still running on the same
brain that was optimized by natural
selection not by Humanity whereas with
an AI it's code sure the version one
will have been optimized by humans but
all the future versions can just be
modified copies made by the AI itself so
it's the first time that the distinction
between Optimizer and optimize kind of
breaks down and it's just kind of this
one positive feedback loop right it's
like this one physical process that it's
hard to predict what will happen when
every time it figures out how
optimization should work better then the
nature of what it itself is kind of
instantly changes right it debugs itself
and humans are pretty bad at debugging
ourselves like we notice biases in
ourselves or we notice some properties
that make us less smart than our
smartest scientists right the fact that
I know I'm less smart than Einstein
that's great but it doesn't let me go
and tweak my brain to actually be as
smart as Einstein right the the present
state of the art in rationality training
is not sufficient to turn an arbitrarily
selected mortal into Einstein which
shows the power of a few minor genetic
quirks of brain design compared to all
the self-help books ever written in the
20th century right so we can't do it
like there are known biases right there
are ways that I know I could be smarter
if I have a little bit more short-term
memory right a little bit better
visualization if my parietal cortex
worked in a fourth dimension that would
help me with a lot of different types of
math right querian right linear algebra
I could do so much if I could just
upgrade the modalities of my thinking um
and and just like you know have fewer
biases um you know maybe a better work
ethic right more energy Rel lless energy
uh Focus so I already know a bunch of
ways that I can improve myself and
that's just scratching the surface right
that's without even being super
intelligent that's just to make me as
good as the smartest and most productive
humans okay so recapping um when we have
ai ai will be an optimization process
it'll have generality it'll have
cumulativity but for the first time
it'll have a feedback loop through the
metal level right it'll have self-
modification or the ability to create
new copies
instantly and that'll make it fun Fally
different from humans it's very much
sparking a positive feedback loop and
people say well don't you know the
economy is growing exponentially yeah
but that's always happened with a fixed
level of optimization driving it right
the exponential growth of the economy
yes there's some economies of scale
there's some positive feedback coming
from the economy itself but there is a
constant background uh optimization
power behind it right you've never seen
what happens when the positive feedback
loop also amplifies the optimization
right so this is absolutely
unprecedented so the lens of
optimization process really helps you
appreciate the phase that we're about to
enter because people ask like why do you
AI doomers expect a f like it's like
such a weird sci-fi scenario and I'm
saying like no it's not weird sci-fi if
you looked at what happened in the last
few billion years the fact that natural
selection kicked off on planet Earth the
fact that humans got kicked off among
the other animals these are crazy sci-fi
developments on planet Earth right so
when AGI comes along and it becomes this
new positive feedback loop because of
self- modification fum will not be like
this new crazy unexpected thing it's
very much in line with the changes that
the Universe this section of the
universe has seen over the years like
this is very much a simple Trend extra
extrapolation fum is kind of the normal
case expecting a non-f scenario is kind
of the weird thing that requires extra
ad
justification so yeah check out the
article optimization and the
intelligence explosion and there's a lot
of different threads we can pull on like
we can dive deeper into precise
definitions of optimization and um and
things like okay why would it have an
intelligence explosion right why would
it be so motivated to optimize its
intelligence which is basically
instrumental convergence so there's a
lot of different threads to pull on but
just the fact that Eleazar has this laid
down like 15 years ago uh these really
important mental models I just hope that
people start thinking this way all right
that's all I got uh let me know if you
have any requests for other sequences
post so you want me to Riff on