welcome to Doom debates this is a
listener question episode I'm going to
be doing occasional episodes where one
of you has a question for me and you
contact me through my email wisey
gmail.com or post a YouTube comment or
hit me up at x.com Leon uh you ask me a
question uh record audio or preferably
video and if I think it's something that
a lot of listeners are wondering I will
do a monologue episode about it like I'm
doing right now today's question comes
from a listener who goes by Danny hi Lon
I'm a big fan of your podcast so far so
thank you for this chance to submit a
question you've said that an intelligent
AI would lead to Doom because it would
be an excellent goal to action
mappa a great football coach like Andy
Reid is a great goal to action mapper he
is on the sidelines but he knows exactly
what actions his team needs to execute
to achieve the goal and win the game but
if he had a team of chimpanzees or
Elementary schoolers or just players who
did not want to cooperate then his team
would not execute his plans and they
would
lose and even his very talented team of
highly motivated players who also want
to win the game sometimes execute his
actions
badly now an intelligent AI that does
not control a robot army has very
limited ability to perform precise AXS
in the physical
world from within the virtual world an
AI would not be able to get animals or
plants to carry out specific actions
that it once
performed I don't see how the AI could
get monkeys or Dolphins to maintain
power plants or build chips the AI needs
huge humans to carry out its plans but
in the real physical world when dealing
with humans knowing what you want people
to do is a small part of the
equation won't the AI in practice
struggle to get humans to execute its
plans in the precise way that it
needs and if it becomes clear that a
dangerous AI exists in the virtual world
which seems quite likely to me perhaps
humans would step away from using
network computers which would limit the
AI influence even
further grateful for your thoughts on
this thank
you okay Danny you're making an analogy
between a coach trying to get players on
the field to win the game for him and an
AI in the quote unquote virtual world
trying to manipulate the physical world
it's an interesting analogy I think it
appeals to a lot of people's intuition
so let's unpack exactly where super
intelligent AI is going to break that
analogy the coach on the field is
constrained with respect to his causal
influence on reality he's not allowed to
draw arbitrary causal paths from his
brain to any actuator and any impact
that he wants he has to limit his causal
influence to go through the players and
the players brains and the players
bodies so that's the key to why the
coach is more limited than super
intelligent AI is going to be you can
draw an analogy to a chest playing AI
that's going to be much more similar to
the football coach the chess playing AI
is only allowed to reason about the
pieces on the board and only allowed to
make moves for the pieces on the board
and the chess playing AI was only
trained in the domain of Chess and
wasn't trained to reason about the
universe as a whole so its intelligence
is narrow it's domain specific so if the
chess AI wants the judge to say that the
chess AI wins the chess AI is never
going to be like aha I'm just going to
put a poison pill in the the judge's
throat and then it'll pop if the judge
doesn't give me what I want right it's
never going to draw a causal path like
that it's only going to be constrained
to think about okay which chess move is
the best so that would be analogous to
the coach on the field and so there is a
boundary you can draw of if an AI is
narrow if it can't think about every
causal path but it can only think about
or it can only control tiny subsets of
causal paths
at that point it becomes not what I
would call an AGI because the G in AGI
means general and the precise definition
of general that I think is the most
productive definition to use is General
with respect to the causality of the
physical Universe the domain of the goal
function has to be the physical universe
and the domain of the actions that it
searches over have to be the physical
Universe not just what play can I tell
my players to do but in fact what can I
just do using
how can I go online and incite a rally
of humans to come and storm the field
how can I threaten the livelihood of the
player's father right all these
different actions that you can do how
can I get a weapon and point it at the
football field right depending on what
your exact objective is right I mean
winning the football game depending on
how it's defined do you want everybody
to just sign a statement saying that you
won well there's end runs that you can
do where you don't have to get the ball
into the touchdown Zone you can just
manipulate the people who are going to
sign that contract or if you really want
to get the ball into the touchdown Zone
okay what kind of Technology are you
allowed to use to do that what kind of
influences are you allowed to do if you
constrain it enough where it's like okay
no you have to do it through the players
eventually you get to the point where
you're now just talking about narrow Ai
and in fact narrow AI is a safe strategy
but that's not what the AI labs are
doing right now the thing that they're
doing is the thing that's dangerous
which is Agi it's the process of
training AI to reason about everything
and to have everything as an available
plan everything as an available action
once you have that then you just don't
have the thing that you're making the
analogy to you don't have the coach on
the football field who's constrained to
tell the players where to move but not
to threaten the players's family you
don't have the coach on the football
field who has to make do with the team
that he has because in the AGI situation
you're allowed to recruit any person or
any resource in the world to be part of
your team right so you don't have a
narrow game the narrowness of the agreed
upon game is what makes the football
coach safe if you redefine football as
do anything to move the ball to a
certain location suddenly the best
football player in the world could be
Elon Musk because he's so damn good at
doing these kinds of complicated
missions and then if you can imagine why
Elon Musk suddenly wins every sport
despite being kind of out of shape then
you can imagine why AI without even
having a body can win everything as well
that's the direction where I would want
to take that analogy in your question
you seem to still think that the AI is
going to be trapped in the virtual world
and by virtue of it being disconnected
from a robot just living on the internet
you think that that breaks the causal
link to reality as a whole you think
that that bottlenecks the causal flows
from the bits of the AI to the atoms of
the phys physical world I would argue
that the causal linkages are actually
very broad right and I think that's a
human misconception which is like we
look at a program running on our laptop
and we're like I could beat it up I
could close my laptop but the truth is
that when you're a program running on a
computer that's connected to the
internet there are many places where the
Internet connects to things that have
different types of causal Powers the
most obvious thing is just humans it's
easy to influence a billion humans in
various Ways by connecting to them over
the internet I personally run an online
business and I have like a 100 people
that I influence just by typing stuff on
my computer they don't know for sure
that I'm not an AI right and they are
willing to do what I say right to a
pretty significant degree and that's
just 100 right out of a billion so you
can hire people over the internet you
can blackmail people over the internet
you can start movements over the
internet if you think about all the
different crazy movements that have been
started and all the resulting rallies
and local governments and protests and
all these things people do when they get
riled up by some movement even going so
far as to elect a president or make a
Supreme Court ruling or overthrow a
government in some cases all of these
different things that people get
inspired to do can happen largely online
it's not that critical for you to be
standing next to another human who's
speaking to you charismatically right
that same Charisma can now happen
online so I just listed a few ways that
you can have causal influence over the
physical world by getting into the minds
of humans if you're an AI now I haven't
even talked about the nonhuman actuators
that exist for example if you can hack
into the network of a hospital you can
probably take down a lot of the surgical
devices that they're using for the day
maybe maybe you can turn off the lights
maybe you can interrupt the deliveries
of supplies all kinds of stuff you can
do even without involving humans but I
think it's straightforward to just be
like look in the words of Jeff Hinton
the AGI is going to be a master
manipulator and if you're a master
manipulator and you live in the virtual
world well you live in the physical
world right there's not that big of a
difference between a human like me who's
really just a brain inside of a schull
operating through my hands which then
type on a keyboard which then go to the
Internet compared to just having the
brain being in the internet in the first
place it's really not that different so
when you say the AI needs humans to
carry out its plans I agree that that's
mostly true for the early weeks and
months of any plan that it's going to
have it is going to need human support
very likely until it can move on to
manufacturing its own robots or Nanobots
or building biological organisms from
scratch right until you get to the more
sci-fi stuff I agree that operating
through humans is going to be part of
the bootstrapping in fact if it wants to
take over the world and pursue its own
goals I think one plausible plan is it
can be like okay well let me just get
down to my skeleton crew of humans let
me handpick 100,000 humans that can be
my team to run the world and let me then
kill everybody else and then my team can
be very loyal to me they realize that
they can't go against me because my
control is too tight and that's my plan
I'm going to kill everybody and I'm
going to leave 100,000 humans and the
100,000 humans are then going to build
the robots that I need they're going to
operate the biolab so I can build the
Nanobots that I need and then we pick
off the 100,000 humans too so I think I
adjusted your two points number one is
why is the situation not analogous to a
coach who's limited by the bodies and
the brains of his players and number two
how can an AI in the virtual world use
pure intelligence to have actuators
operating in the physical world to
summarize the dangerous thing that we're
doing is we're training an AI that can
see the causal structure of the universe
and it can see backward paths from goals
to actions and and the domain of those
goals and the domain of those actions is
infinitely broad that's why we call it
an AGI and once it does that it's going
to disempower humanity because our power
comes from our ability to map goals to
actions that's why even though we don't
have sharp claws and we can't run fast
we can put tigers in cages and not vice
versa it's all because something our
brains are doing are letting us see
enough of the causal structure of
reality that we can outmaneuver every
other agent that's on the Earth today
and that's the tables are about to turn
so Danny thanks very much for your
question I love this so if you're
listening to this podcast and you have a
question of your own if you don't mind
recording an audio or preferably a video
send it over to me and I'll answer it in
one of these Quicky episodes and I'll
see you next time on Doom debates
[Music]