okay mysterious answers to mysterious
questions this is a pretty profound
thing to keep in the back of your mind
when you think about stuff because
there's so many topics that are
wonderfully mysterious right like
Consciousness God time the Big Bang
right and there's clearly things that
humans haven't really gotten our heads
around yet and it seems like maybe
they're infinitely mysterious and we'll
never figure it out right maybe we'll
just never figure out Consciousness
it'll just be a mystery until humans go
extinct um the thing to keep in mind
though is that it's not like the
universe itself has ever turned out to
be inherently mysterious like mystery is
actually a property of you in your brain
that you have when you're pondering
reality like reality just is what it is
right and the same non- mysteriousness
that you get when you're like eating
some food or going to the grocery store
or doing like basic addition right
things that are like mundane that you
feel like you just understand they're
like the least mysterious things you can
imagine well those are kind of like
still the same as when you think about
like free will or Consciousness or love
like at the end of the the day the
universe doesn't really draw the
distinction it's more like we as humans
might have a Distinction on what we feel
comfortable with our understanding of
right but there's no clear line and in
my mind the best way to see that is when
you look historically at things that
used to be totally mysterious and then
have made a complete shift they've been
pulled into the magisterium of the
mundane like a good example of that I
think is um living matter so like my
hands right my hands move under my
command and it feels like magic right
it's like how do they obey my will and
how does the flesh animate right in a
way that like a piece of wood doesn't
right unless it's in a living tree and
then it animates very slowly but like a
piece of concrete maybe doesn't animate
so much or a rock but like what's going
on with My Flesh responding to my will
like certainly that phenomenon is
nothing like we could ever build right I
mean that's what they thought a couple
hundred years ago until finally we
learned a little bit about you know
electricity neurons right signals maybe
we don't know everything about how the
brain works but we certainly know that
you can uh sever somebody's arm and
attach electrical stimulants to it and
get it to move right get it to respond
to the will and we can also build
robotic arms and so suddenly it's like
wow okay wires are a thing and WI are
mundane and similarly a lot of the
chemicals that are being used right
chemicals used to be kind of magic like
the chemicals of life and now we can
synthesize a lot of those chemicals like
Uria is a famous example of something
that we just thought had to be like only
life could make it but it's like no we
can synthesize it um so so that's the
example of wires and then even in the
example like free will it has become a
lot less mysterious to us now that we
have complex algorithms and we see these
algorithms making decisions that seem to
involve a lot of judgment and we're like
okay well
the fact that humans can make complex
judgments based on weighing a lot of
different factors and they can't predict
what they're going to do that seems like
pretty much the same phenomenon as the
kind of decision- making happening in
these computerized algorithms so even
the idea that we have free will as far
as I understand has become non-
mysterious because it's like there's
nothing else to explain it's like yeah I
feel like I can do anything because I
don't know what I'm going to do yet and
then I do some processing in my brain
and then I do something right just like
any any complex algorithm does so Free
Will has largely been demystified uh
fire used to be this magical thing right
like one of the basic substances and now
it's like well it is an exothermic
reaction right it's been uh reduced to a
lower level right so our understanding
of chemistry and physics says yeah fire
is like a type of thing it's not
fundamental right similarly color it's
not like there's uh fundamental colors
there's wavelengths of light and the
wavelengths go beyond the visible
spectrum and the you know the ey only
has three different uh types of cone
receptor and so even what we see is
color we can have like different
wavelengths making us see the same color
so it's you know it's it's not a basic
phenomenon so this interplay between
phenomena that seem wonderful and
mysterious and qualia and special
compared to like okay well everything is
being flattened down to like the same
mundane magisterium of science like that
that seems to be the treadmill right is
anytime we think something is like
amazing and mysterious well wait a few
years and then it's like okay it's
another piece of Science and there's
nothing wrong with that right like
there's nothing wrong with understanding
that the rainbow is like refracted light
and chemistry and that light is an
electromagnetic wave like that doesn't
make the rainbow any less beautiful it
just makes it not fundamentally
ontologically mysterious right like the
rainbow is made out of the same stuff
that I don't even know a rock or a piece
of bread is made out of right like
whatever you think is mundane a rainbow
is made out of the same stuff but it's
still cool right so that's the general
treadmill and I think this is important
to keep in mind because there's still a
few more things that seem mysterious to
us right like Consciousness seems
mysterious what AI is going to do
whether AI is going to end the world or
create Heaven that kind of seems
wonderfully mysterious of a question to
many people right many people just
intuitively feel like the AI is going to
be so smart and and they're
fundamentally optimistic so they just
think that the AI is going to be
wonderful instead of being like well can
I just use mundane reasoning to predict
what the AI is going to do or there
certain uh principles that uh you know
things like instrumental convergence as
applied to like toy algorithms can I
generalize those principles right that
tends to be my Approach right I don't
get sucked into the uh you know the love
and the Vibes of it all uh there's
another example that I like to turn to
when I talk about how mysterious things
have become mundane um consider the
question of like who are we and where
did we come from you know why are we the
way we are if IID asked that question
200 years ago why are we the way we are
who are we where did we come from it
would be like nobody knows man light up
a joint right and just just ponder that
for the rest of your life but Darwin
right we know we know the answer right
an evolutionary process evolutionary
psychology right so the bag of emotions
that we have in our head it's not
infinitely mysterious like it is a
product of a certain optimization
process natural selection evolution by
natural selection and it has a lot of
optimization so it's non-trivial right
it it has a lot of engineering of a
certain type to it um you know emotions
have purposes and yet it's also not like
some sort of Ideal right the point is
when I ask who are we and where did we
come from it's like well we we have a
family tree right full of like all kinds
of different organisms right and we have
engineering that goes into the different
parts including our psychology including
our mental parts right our mental parts
are organs just like everything else and
and like I'm not just trying to teach
you a biology lesson I'm trying to teach
you a philosophical lesson to make you
notice that something that used to be
wonderfully mysterious something that
used to be like it didn't even seem like
science it seemed like philosophy right
it seemed like one day you're you're
doing hard science the next day you're
asking who are we and where do we come
from and now you're in the philosophy
Department you're smoking a joint you're
completely disconnected from science
that's kind of what it felt like and
then it turned out that when we had the
theory of evolution it turned out no
it's not disconnected from science right
you can see you can go in a lab and you
can see the the history of different
organs and like how they mutated over
time and how they got selected for to
become what they are so once you start
to realize that this is the pattern that
things have gone in where philosophy
tends to move into the mundane realm of
science then you can start to anticipate
how the next thing is going to go down
right when we get a better understanding
of Consciousness when we get a better
understanding of SpaceTime of whether
the universe is infinite of whether
there's a Multiverse of whether we're
living in a simulation when we get a
better understanding of these things
it's going to have the flavor of when we
got a better understanding of who are we
and where did we come from it's going to
have internal moving Parts we're going
to open up the black box and it's not
just going to be like a wonderful God
Soul right it's not going to be this
beautiful orb of insight no it's going
to be like gears right it's going to be
like logically interconnected parts
right like the idea of mutation and
natural selection and the idea of like
uh inclusive genetic fitness and uh bits
of information that can be transmitted
across the generations and and how many
bits are able to be maintained uh with
error correction like all of these
little gears are going to show up once
we start to get a better understanding
of the concept um and so that's what to
expect out of every concept is that it
turns out that the Black Box isn't a
perfect empty black Godlike material but
rather it's just like the same thing
that makes cars go with internal
combustion and explosions and gears like
everything is like that right on
philosophically everything is just like
one project of understanding and if
something feels mysterious that is a
hopefully temporary fact fact about your
brain or maybe it's a permanent fact
about your brain but it's a fact about
your brain not a fact about reality so
that's my summary of elzar's post
mysterious answers to mysterious
questions