so there's a lot of people in the world
making claims you have people making
claims saying I think the world is going
to be good cuz I'm an optimist right or
hey I believe in God because I have
faith so you have all kinds of claims
that you want to evaluate and one thing
to look at is the algorithm that causes
the person making the claim to make the
claim like causally where did the claim
come from what caused the words to be
spoken what caused the words to be
written well maybe there's a
justification maybe there's an essay
where the bottom line of the essay is a
conclusion but you can read the essay to
read arguments that led to the
conclusion okay that's promising you can
read arguments but were the arguments
just written because the person wanted
to support the conclusion or were the
arguments written because the person was
incorporating evidence in order to
reason forward toward a
conclusion the key thing to look for is
if the person's pen when they write on
the paper if the person's pen is
actually being somehow controlled by
reality so that the outcome of their
conclusion the thing that they end up
writing at the bottom of the essay it
isn't just their predetermined
conclusion it isn't just their faith but
they're actually letting reality guide
their beliefs they're letting reality
update their beliefs right they're
taking in all the evidence in such a way
that they could go left they could go
right they could go to any possible
conclusion depending on what reality
actually inputs into them right so
there's some sort of algorithm them that
they're using to write their essay to
move their pen where the content of the
essay can vary depending on how reality
could vary right we could live in
different worlds we could live in a
world where there's a vengeful God right
and he and he answers prayers we we
could hypothetically logically live in
that world or we could live in a world
where there is no God and in where you
know and alien teenagers are just
controlling the computer simulation we
could live in all kinds of different
worlds and when you want to make a
rational argument it's important that
there is a causal linkage forward from
the type of word that we're living in
all the way through the brain of the
person writing and into the words that
the person's writing down and then
coming out the end where they write down
their bottom line right that has to be
causally connected like you can actually
trace the gears that move the pen right
the person writing is just a physical
system so don't be misled by the fact
that the words have meaning in English
right ultimately it doesn't matter to
just compile the claim and treat it as a
meaningful claim because it might be
wrong the extent to which the claim is
correct to which it's accurate about our
universe is the extent to which the pen
was moved by reality right the causal
connection the entanglement between the
process that writes the argument and the
content of the argument otherwise if
it's just content driven by what
somebody feels like or what they want to
convince you of or what they want to
grift you of right what they're
financially motivated to convince you of
if if the algorithm of what they're
writing is driven by something other
than evidential entanglement with
reality then you're going to get an
essay that's less rational and you might
get an essay that's a
rationalization right so the two words
rational and rationalization they sound
very similar but rational actually means
following the algorithm forward to reach
correct conclusions and rationalization
means writing whatever you feel like and
then basically faking the stuff above
that right as if you've done the
rational procedure but you're not you're
just using a totally different procedure
because you're trying to convince
yourself and you're trying to convince
others but you're not setting up the
proper evidential entanglement with
reality so that's the difference between
being rational and just writing down a
rationalization so in that a Bowski
called the bottom line he has a great
example of how somebody who writes the
bottom line first without actually
making sure that the bottom line can
vary according to how it's entangled
with reality somebody who does that is
not going to give you a lot of rational
evidence and you need to distinguish
those kinds of bottom lines with a
bottom line that was arrived at by a
rational algorithm