you estimated that the timeline toward
AGI you quoted in your blog post is at
least a century and maybe a great many
centuries at current rates of progress
so so in your view it's pretty plausible
that we can get to 2100 and there's
still jobs that humans are doing better
than
AIS right that's not that's not at all
crazy I'm trying to not get caught up in
the excitement over recent demos and
look at the actual change in the economy
and when you do that
change is much steadier and you don't
see things like llms passing the TR test
you don't think that that's highly
indicative of doing everything so I
anchor
on the actual history of progress in
Automation in AI in terms of doing jobs
and I say that's been pretty steady to
me it's crazy to think like it'll be
2100 and there are just some skills that
AI is having a hard time with can you
maybe flesh out that scenario in an
analysis I did of Automation and jobs
from 19 1999 to 2019 we actually had a
metric of how automated each job was and
I remember from that the least automated
jobs the bottom of the list one was
carpet installers so I might tell you AI
is pretty far from installing
carpets okay do you have any sort of
guess as to whether carpet insulation is
something that'll fall maybe in the
first versus the second half of the
century of AI progress I mean I got to
say when I think about automating carpet
installer it seems easier than the
median job to automate but I still got
to notice we haven't done it MH let's
say uh let's say a robot came in and
installed your carpet in five years how
shocked would you
be um I would be surprised but I don't
know if I'd be shocked I
mean I don't have very strong
expectations about any one job it's the
aggregate of all jobs that I would be
very surprised about it's it's since I
have this overall trend