do you think we're going to live till
the year 2030 cuz I'm not convinced I'm
luron shapira and this is Doom
debates welcome everybody you are
listening to Doom
debates I am an AI Doomer I think the
world is going to end soon and I've been
having a bunch of debates with people
about it where they come and tell me why
it's going to be fine we're not going to
have doom and then I tell them yes we
are and I've done this so many times
that I realized I need to collect this
all at a podcast feed for your listening
pleasure and for our first episode I've
brought on my good friend Orie Nagel who
is actually not going to debate me
because he's also become another Doomer
but he is going to be a great
conversation partner because I've known
him since I was like 12 in middle school
we went to the same youth group we've
stayed friends since then he often uh
weighs in on a lot of the stuff I'm
doing he gives me PR advice because
that's his professional special ization
and he has also been getting
progressively more worried about Doom so
he's going to be giving you his two
cents on that issue and then we're just
going to talk about like what we're all
about and what we value and how we're
going to make a good podcast all right
sounds good Lon and what's up
everyone what's up what's up so luron
Doom debates this is your podcast what
do you want to talk about I got to say
this is a very meaningful moment for me
because I've been listening to podcasts
since I'm trying to think how far since
like 2009 you know near the dawn of
podcasting I've been listening to like
nonstop hours a day of podcast and the
whole time I didn't make one why didn't
I make one the only reason I'm finally
decided hey it's time is because I've
been putting out a bunch of content
already so now I'm like great people
just want this content aggregated in a
podcast feed with some light editing and
then also I can supplement it I can
bring on a few more people who I think
are really smart who I think the world
needs to hear about so like I'm now
confid that for sure I'm going to get to
12 episodes I'm going to get to 12 * 12
equals 144 episodes okay that's a prom
oh my God yeah 12
squared take that back that's too many
man no I think I can do it because it's
it's just a matter of continuing the
sustained effort that I've already done
over the last year and a half talking
about Aid doom on Twitter getting on a
bunch of other people's interviews I've
done a bunch of media um I was on Robert
Wright the other day I was on one I
can't even talk about so I think this is
just like a thing that I do now is talk
a lot put out a lot of media on a doom
and that's why I'm confident I'm going
to have a lot of episodes of this
podcast and also I've even done like
some monologue stuff where I just like
go find interesting articles and like
explain them to the Layman because you
know why why me right when there's
definitely smarter people people more
knowledgeable about AI but you know how
you can mix two different skills
together and then suddenly you could be
close to the top of this mixed skill so
the skill skills I'm mixing are like
number one being a longtime AI Doomer
who's deeply studied less wrong and alaz
owski sequences and a number of other
writings um and really internalize them
and understanding why we're doomed
combine that at the intersection of this
other skill which is just like talking
in a way that's pretty understandable
not too complex relatively entertaining
relatively short and sweet so I think
combining those two skills puts me in a
pretty unique group yeah definitely and
I think
I think it's worth expanding a little
bit more about your background I mean
because okay those are two skills you
have that you bring that you'll that
you'll bring to the subject but um well
I guess there are two questions one is
is this what is the what is the focus of
this podcast I mean it's called Doom
debates so is it just going to be on AI
or is it going to be on AI and climate
change and you know some other Hot
Topics um so that's one one question
yeah yeah yeah yeah great question um so
I've I've written a description Doom
debates urgent disagreements that must
be resolved before the world
ends
okay so anything so you know if somebody
is a nuclear Doomer like Annie Jacobson
wrote a really great book that came out
a couple months ago about how nuclear
war is a huge threat if she wants to
come on and talk to me about why we're
doomed because of nukes that is an
urgent disagreement I mean I actually
agree with her but maybe we'll find
somebody who disagrees and it must be
resolved before the world ends totally
right if somebody wants to talk about
biodom sure but that said I think the
king of all Dooms the one that's the
most urgent and important is AI Doom
right so I'm an AI Doomer and I expect
that most of the episodes of this
podcast will just be me raising the red
flag waving my arms around being like
Hey we're doomed we're doomed we're
doomed and then somebody else will be
there and they'll be like no we're
actually fine like look at all this
stuff that's good and then we're just
going to Hash it out and then hopefully
you know hopefully there's an impact a
downstream impact from this where maybe
people will listen to the podcast and
they'll be like hey uh I feel like the
people telling Lon everything's fine
don't really understand what lon's
saying I feel like it's a little
one-sided here and we actually are
doomed and maybe we should like pause AI
which is my current uh policy
recommendation so that's kind of My Hope
or potentially I guess there's another
outcome which is like some of the people
who come and tell me that we're not
doomed maybe they'll convince me and
then if that happens great I will
probably at that point stop the podcast
and just get a different hobby right
well could you be convinced in one
debate or will will it take a few
uh so I mean in theory I could be
convinced in one debate um but I would
probably have to do some follow-up
research but like okay it is worth
saying that like I'm not like I I'm not
a born Doomer right it's not like my
whole life I've been saying the sky is
falling we're doomed yeah I'm I'm just
somebody who likes taking a position
that I think is strong right so like I
get a kick out of being like hey some a
lot of people are acting like things are
normal and they're they think AI is only
at risk of like taking some jobs whereas
I'm pointing out that the world is
literally ending right so I enjoy the
contrarianism of that position I'm a
natural contrarian um but I could be
contrarian on anything right like I have
a big menu of things that I could be
contant about I could just go learn
about any field right so I could be I
could go into quantum mechanics and in
quantum mechanics I'm really big on the
many worlds interpretation being correct
for instance so it's it's about like I
mean I'm kind of with majority at this
point I think it's more like 60% believe
me but like those other 40% I can go
really hardcore attacking their side
right so like I'm I'm happy to just take
up strong positions in any field that I
go into like it doesn't just have to be
a doom and I spent most of 2022 focusing
on Twitter on just dunking on crypto VCS
and pointing out how ridiculous it is to
think that blockchain technology is
going to enable a use case that has
nothing to do with cryptocurrency right
because there's this whole web 3
movement when people are like social
media is going to be all about
blockchain technology and blockchain
technology is going to like free people
to be able to interact better on the
Social Web like nonsensical pitches
right which of course amounted to zero
like I was totally right about that um
but I spent 2022 doing that because I'm
like wow Andreas and Horwitz has a $7
million crypto fund that's all pouring
into stuff that's going to be a zero
that's funny that's worth a dunk right
so like I'm happy to seek out uh
contrarian positions in any field and
I'm not going to lack for hobbies if AI
Doom doesn't become a thing like I'm
happy to just be like oh wow hey
somebody had a really good argument why
we're not doomed and off the top of my
head that specific argument could for
instance be like hey scaling is going to
Plateau like look at these reasons why
scaling plateaus I'm not somebody I'm
not going to like you know die on the
hill of being like scaling must not
Plateau if somebody has a reason why
scaling is going to plateau and we we
have a century to figure it out great
you know I'm happy to hear that like I'm
not going to be like no I'm going to
lose ad revenue from this podcast like
that's totally fine I have other hobbies
that I can get I'm just an AI Doomer
because I really think that we're doomed
from AI okay so I hope that people will
give me the benefit of the doubt that
I'm letting my behavior about what I
want to argue about
be Downstream causally Downstream of the
actual quality of the argument like I'm
doing a doom podcast because I actually
believe that we're doomed because of the
quality of the argument that we're
doomed so it goes that way not the other
way where first I'm a Doomer and then I
find some topic that tells us we're
doomed and then go from there it didn't
go that way right or put another way
what you're saying is that you're open
to changing your mind like if someone
comes with a a persuasive argument you
you you may change your mind exactly
right and just a a little about me as a
person um so I'm a self-diagnosed aspie
I'm a I'm a rational person relatively
low emotion person so my mind is a calm
place right like the tide is low so I
can see the the sand the Sandy Beach of
logic because there's not a lot of waves
and Tide washing it out um so so it's
pretty easy for me to just like take
other positions like it's it's not a big
deal like I have I feel like I have um I
can flip all the different different
bits of my beliefs and it's just like
not a problem right I can the same way
that a computer compiles a program it's
pretty easy for me to imagine just
writing okay these are your beliefs act
accordingly right and then here's an
algorithm to update your beliefs it's
called basian reasoning right it's when
you collect evidence and then use the
evidence to help write your beliefs like
that's not hard for me to do I know it's
a little bit unnatural for humans
because it's like hey I I don't want to
take on a belief if it's going to like
alienate My Tribe right so that's a
natural human reaction like I want to be
I want people to like me and and feel
like I'm on the same page as them that's
like a natural human reaction I'm the
opposite I'm more of the contrarian side
where it's like oh wow nice I get to do
a belief that'll put me in a position of
of you know being more correct than
everybody else and then I have to like
explain how they're wrong and then
eventually they'll learn and then
they'll realize like I should be the
king because I knew because I knew the
more correct belief right like obviously
in practice it it doesn't play out like
that it's more likely to get people
pissed off at me and you know so the
there's probably a reason why most
people aren't contrarians it probably
isn't a a great way to gain status in
most cases but that's how I'm wired
right so I'm just saying the point of
all this is that like I don't have a
problem just changing my mind I'm not
psych psychologically opposed to
changing mind I'm not a high anxiety
person right so I'm not a the reason I
went into AI Doom isn't because it's a
fit for my level of anxiety I wake up
and I'm like oh it's it's a great day
time to like explain why we're doomed
but like or I'm happy to explain
something else like time to explain
something right just that something
happens to be why we're doomed yeah um
is there anything else that
that you think listeners should know
about you I mean you've like why should
we listen to your opinion on this right
you you talked a you talked a lot about
yeah you try to see things in a logical
way it's your natural disposition I mean
you have you were in interested in this
in the Spheres from a pretty for for a
long time now but um I don't know maybe
it's a great question yeah what's my
credibility in term so I don't have a
PhD I have a bachelor's in computer
science from UC Berkeley with high
honors um for what that's worth um I do
software engineering I'm I'm a 10x
engineer uh I've been studying AI Doom
since 2007 I know quite a lot about it
at the end of the day though um oh and
and as we discussed before right so like
I know the art of rationality I know the
principle of letting evidence write your
beliefs instead of Defending Your
beliefs I know how to avoid things like
wishful thinking anchoring bias u i I
know how to um uh you know the idea of
confirmation bias for example I know how
to avoid right it's like all these
failure modes that make people think
worse I have studied and have a lot of
protections against so like I'm a pretty
rational guy um so to the extent that
that makes you want to listen to me more
and just trust whatever I say great you
can use that as a starting point to
predict how good I'm going to argue but
at the end of the day you can also just
see me as having zero credibility just
being a random guy don't worry about who
I am just go into my debates listen to
the arguments that I'm making follow the
arguments judge the arguments locally
meaning without even using the context
of who L be is just judge the arguments
compare them to the arguments that the
other person is saying and just go based
on the arguments and maybe eventually if
you listen to enough of my arguments you
might say like uh Lon has like a pattern
of having good arguments that are well
Justified and he himself is as likely as
I am to notice when his arguments need
to be changed so I trust him so much
that I don't even have to notice when
he's wrong he'll notice when he's wrong
right so if you want to build up that
level of trust in me personally go for
it but at the end of the day you can
pretend that I have no credibility and
you're just listening to my arguments
yeah I mean that's I think that's the
case for me I I've found you to be a
pretty trustworthy um person uh as far
as just making arguments about I don't
know technology or or things things in
the future um so so yeah I I think you I
think you mostly call balls and Strikes
as you see it um you know well this is
why we have to listen everybody has to
listen to the Ori Nagel episode first so
that they can go into the other episode
knowing that uh I'm a highly credible
Source exactly I just gave you that vot
of confidence and now everyone's every
with me on that so who are you going to
debate well you can see on my YouTube I
have a a few uh random debates I've
already posted one answer is just
anybody who's interesting on Twitter
that I want to have a longer exchange
with I can invite them to a Twitter
space or just directly like come on Zoom
call me oneon-one we'll hash it out for
like 45 minutes and then I'll post it
here for everybody's enjoyment um I
think it's productive to even debate
random people who have like no
reputation as long as they have a pretty
interesting point of view they come and
debate me and it's interesting because
they bring up points that aren't just
the only points you can bring up right
like the other side is so complex you
can have so many different positions
that it's just interesting to have me
address different positions right or or
to have the audience explore my my
opinions on those particular sub points
of the Large review that were not doomed
just as an example on Twitter you have
the E they call themselves The
accelerationists and they're just like
AI risk is pretty minimal um you know F
risk recursive self-improvement is a
very low risk at least not rapid you
know there's going to be a nice slow
takeoff progress is always good it's
just going to be continuous with other
Tech progress that's kind of their
position and then you have other people
being like yeah recursive
selfimprovement is very scary but I just
don't even think that uh computers will
ever get to the level of the human brain
because the human brain is just like so
different and the human brain is like a
quantum computer or it's a thermodynamic
computer right there like all these
other other like I even call it the Doom
train the Doom train is like the train
logically to believing that we're doomed
and the Doom train has a lot of
different stops where you can get off so
one of the earliest stops you can get
off the Doom train is you can say we're
not doomed because silicon computers are
just never going to be competitive with
brains in how good they are at thinking
and reasoning and and being powerful in
the world so that's like a very early
stop in the Doom train is is you're
basically um dismiss
silicon right right so so you're you're
open to debating interesting people on
Twitter uh accelerationists but it could
be someone who has a prominent profile
or someone who maybe has no profile at
all exactly yeah a couple of good
debates I've done in the past are I did
one with George Hots who's a really
smart guy that a lot of people respect
his opinion for a good reason I debated
him on the AI Doom front and it felt
like his opinions were not super fully
baked when he had them because he he was
kind of jumping around so I'll post that
in the feed I think a lot of people will
enjoy it um but that's an example of
somebody relatively prominent that I've
had a debate with I had a debate with a
bunch of accelerationists I think Bas
Lord was in the debate that was a very
Rowdy debate because there was no
moderator it was kind of like me
wandering into the lion's den and
debating them on on their Turf the ideal
episode of Doom debates would be
something like that monk debates episode
from last year when we had Yan laon Max
tegmark yosua Benjo Melanie Mitchell
because those were all smart people they
all had well thought out positions um
they hash it out in a very high quality
format a lot of mutual respect and we
all got to learn a little bit about what
their positions are and it also just
raised it elevated the prominence right
it moved the Overton window toward like
yes this is a huge deal like we need to
be debating this so that would be kind
of like the the Pinnacle of an ideal
Doom debate um maybe with maybe more
in-depth maybe twice as long with the
moderator being a little bit more
focused on the cruxes try to like get
more um basically just try to get more
Sparks going um because I just felt the
monk debate was you know it just wasn't
super fast pace and then time ran out so
quick but like my point is I may
moderate um debates between other people
that I think are high quality if I think
that it just sheds light right
especially if prominent people want to
debate if they consider me a good
moderator I'm obviously biased because I
think that we're doomed so I might have
to find a different moderator but I
might lay down um some rules that some
other Moder moderator can use to
maintain a good debate um also on the
question of who am I going to invite
there's also a number of people that I
think are super um they're not wellknown
they're super low profile
and if I could just like ask them some
pointed questions about what they're
working on or what they think I think
it's fascinating stuff and like I I meet
them um just in the course of like
wandering around going to conferences
hanging out with like the less wrong
rationalist crowd and these are just
like Fascinating People and somebody
just needs to like ask them the right
questions and like Teach the World about
what they have to say on the topic of AI
doom and rationality and related topics
so I'm going to be inviting some of
those people too nice all right well
let's lay out the proverbial like red
carpet I mean you know let's say the
floor is yours who would you like to
debate and why um I'll say Yan Lon
because he is in a position where he's
super prominent he leads I don't think
that he has direct reports but he's the
um thought leader of AI at meta and what
Mark Zuckerberg recently said about how
meta's mission is basically to develop
toward open source AGI sounds like he's
been listening to Yan laon so Yan lon's
highly influential he he obviously a
smart guy he he is an accomplished guy
he won the 2018 Turing award um but he
goes around on X on Twitter telling
everybody that there's literally his
words like a less than
0.001% chance of Doom from AI which is
just wildly miscalibrated that you would
think that the chance is is that low
like for God's sake give me a 1% chance
please sir you can't even give me a 1%
chance when there's like if you just
look around as a purely like social
proof thing you know this letter is
getting signed that it's an existential
risk comparable to nukes and he sees all
that and he still doesn't think hey you
know what maybe just purely in the
interest of unknown unknowns like maybe
something is wrong with my own thought
process and I'm going to assign a 1%
probability to that like nope 0. 1%
according to Yan Lon so yeah he's he's
somebody where if if you just look at
the arguments he makes locally he says a
bunch of stuff that is like so clearly
wrong I mean even if at the end of the
day he turns out to be right that we're
not all going to die great but the way
he argues for it he just throws out a
bunch of really poor arguments so I
would love to get him I know he did he
agreed to that one debate last year
which was great I respect that he hasn't
blocked me on Twitter I respect that um
if yeah if he wants to come on the
podcast he's more than welcome to all
right well you're setting your bar High
that's one of the top uh yeah exactly I
went straight to the top one the top
most respected sort of AI acceleration
voices right exactly and of course Mark
andreon um but he I mean the fact you
know he blocked me so I doubt he's going
to turn around and go on the podcast but
uh yeah Mark andreon uh because I'm
thinking of like prominent people who
are who who think everything is fine
with AI who really haven't subjected
themselves to pretty basic levels of
debate I mean Mark andreon has never
done uh you know debated an AI Doomer um
Yan Lon to his credit did it once right
good for him um another person who's
who's very Pro AI um or not worried
about AI is Stephen Pinker and I love
Stephen Pinker right like his books I
consider out of the top 10 books ever
read in my life I'd probably give two or
three to Stephen Pinker like how the
mind works just amazing books that he
writes like amazing guy yeah but on the
topic of AI he's like terrible he does
not even engage with the most basic
arguments he really is dismissive and
he's apparently trying to shoehorn AI
into his patterns of of saying hey you
know the rational Optimist or his book
is I forgot what his book is called the
better angels of our nature he makes a
lot of good points about how life is
getting way better but then he's like
and look I is going to like continue
making life way better but it's like
hold on Stephen Pinker like there's
actually arguments you have to engage
with like this is going to break your
Trend it's going to stop getting better
if AI takes over the world um so so yeah
I'd love to have Ste Ste on and hash it
out which brings me to the next guy in
the same vein David Deutsch David Deutch
all right another guy who's written two
amazing books right the fabric of
reality and the beginning of infinity
really great books um and just you know
the way he um is a many worlds
Enthusiast right the many worlds
interpretation of quantum theory I think
he spot on he has a really Lucid
explanation of that in his book so
respect the hell out of David Deutsch as
well but again once again on the AI
front he loves to say that AI has not
shown like true creativity AI has not
shown the ability to create new
knowledge so I went on X and I like
constantly it's like I do this like
every couple months I can't help myself
I go on X and I'm like all right
somebody come tell me what it means for
anyi to not be able to create new
knowledge like give me a sample input
output that shows somebody creating new
knowledge that you think an AI can't
also do and nobody ever does it and then
people come in and they're like I'll
give you a sample input output the input
is uh please tell me the the geometry of
the shape and the output is I don't feel
like doing that and and I'm like okay
can't you just like give a a a system
prompt to a GPT saying like act like a
spoiled brat and then you know and now
respond to the following prompt and and
then it'll do that like you think acting
like a swed brat is not something that
current LMS can do and they like you
don't get it man they have to just
choose to do it they like okay just
asking for an input output man you're
like follow the format give me you know
Json format an input output and and I'll
and I'll try to produce it I mean on the
subject of David Deutsch I saw the uh
the tweet that you made of you took a
capture and then you made it to David
Deutsch capture describe that describe
that to people yeah sure so last last
year uh inspiration struck me where I'm
like okay David deuts thinks that AIS
are far below humans because they can't
create new knowledge his words create
new knowledge I actually don't know what
he means by that um so if that really is
a differentiation between humans and AI
let's use that as a capture right if if
I'm trying to visit PornHub using a VPN
they're they're going to want to see me
create new knowledge before they'll let
me access it because that's a sure fire
proof that I'm a human and not an
AI That's all it's all you gotta do just
create new knowledge right yeah I mean I
I I can I can create new zygotes when
I'm when I'm on PornHub but I can't
create new knowledge
wow it's a brilliant idea it's a
brilliant
idea um okay well uh you know you're
going after the the some of the big
names who all have their own unique
arguments their own unique takes and it
would be it would be so cool to watch
you or to hear you have a debate with
one of those people but I guess me as a
listener I'd be interested maybe maybe
someone who shares those views like a A
deutser or someone who really agrees
with Mark Andre like how about someone
like
that yeah yeah yeah just debate somebody
who's you know even if it's not the the
leader of the movement himself it's just
somebody who's like hey I'm a believer
of this movement right and that's I mean
to be fair I'm very much kind of a
member of the owski movement right
Alazar owski I mean the Delta between
why I think we're doomed and why Alazar
owski thinks we're doomed is virtually
zero right I just think that he elzra is
just underrated I think he figured out
so many key principles of why we're
doomed and the world has just been
slowly catching up right so I often joke
that I Leon shapir I'm just a stochastic
parrot for the less wrong sequences
written by alazri owski I haven't
created much new knowledge I'm just
trying to you know catch people up I'm
just doing Arbitrage I'm like this
knowledge is true like I'm just trying
to disseminate it all right maybe we
should maybe you should have one episode
where it's uh uh just an llm just
trained on the Les wrong sequences and
just have that interact with your uh
your I I I could I've debated llms
before on a couple points um and and
it's interesting it's an interesting way
to explore their limitations and it's
kind of funny because I found that they
have limitations that are kind of
similar to human limitations which is
like I'll ask them a question and
they'll bust out like a bunch of points
right like a bullet point list but then
when I try to drill down I'm like well
what what about this like tell me more
and I guess the example that comes to my
mind is on the blockchain stuff I was
like okay explain why blockchain has a
use case um like list some use cases and
it's like well blockchain has a use case
in for examp example like tracking a
shipment uh you know it can have like it
can have a decentralized database so
anybody can see like where the shipments
are going and then I keep pressing it
I'm like well wait what about what are
the advantages to just not using a
regular database and it's like oh
blockchain has a bunch of advantages
like decentralization double spend
prevention right like it kept listing
these bullet point buzzer like
cryptography like zero knowledge proof
like it kept listing I'm like wait wait
in this specific example right I'm just
trying to send a package like don't
generalize just tell me this one package
that I'm sending like why can't UPS just
maintain the database and publish it
publish data d right and then and when I
kept drilling it on the specific example
of course just like humans it never gave
the answer but it was interesting how
far it could get just being like look I
can explain this concept in general
right and like never engaging with the
specificity of it right all right well
there you have it Mark Andre Stephen
Pinker Yan laon who else was it that's
right Yan laon I mean obviously any just
anybody prominent in the AI field who
wants to tell me why we're not doomed
now if you want to come tell me why we
are doomed that's going to be less
interesting cuz I just agree with you
but I can potentially interview you or
give you some questions but yeah but
that said I'm throwing down the gauntlet
Yan laon I'm inviting you to come debate
Doom yeah Yan Lon Mark andri and Steven
Pinker David Deutsch or anybody who
really believes in all that stuff and
then like there there could be people
with uh an interesting mix of views like
if you're um just like a really
religious person if you have a lot of
respect within the religious community
and think that everything's going to be
fine because God's going to make it fine
you are invited to come tell me why
God's going to make it fine we can see
how how you're I mean it's it's funny
but I've recently been seeing a couple
things on the religion side where some
people are like no man religion makes a
ton of sense like I know Peter teal
obviously a brilliant guy but he's like
a Christian apparently like he thinks
the Bible has like relevant wisdom for
us um and uh like he sees the world
through the lens of like you know
everything is like an analogy for
something and the Bible has like plenty
of good analogies but like not seeing it
Peter teal I feel like you're really
you're really forcing these analogies on
us all right well maybe we could save
that debate for another time because I
might agree with Peter teal on some of
those points oh okay oh
damn I I think I I'll probably do a
couple religion episodes because I
recently uh tweeted one of those little
Comics you know like the midwit comics
where I'm like look the religion
actually has four different tiers it's
the only subject I've seen with four
tiers where the the caveman brain is
saying like God is
real and then you've got the midwit
being like God isn't real and then
you've got this the smart ninja going
like God is a deeper thing it's just how
we deal with the parts of the universe
that we can't access that make it feel
like our life is more meaningful okay
and then you've got a fourth person
who's just a higher IQ than all of them
and he's just saying God isn't
[Laughter]
realing with the Midway well it's um
fitting that you bring up memes here
since meme is the cover photo of your uh
of your podcast so very consistent yeah
so the Fire Dog Coffee meme is a meme
that rationalists use a lot it really
speaks to me because it's just like I
really do think the world is burning
like I think this is all going to end
this nice human experiment that we've
created and most people are still
chilling right like they they really
invested in the idea that like no it's
not it's still going to be kind of
normal somehow yeah so you have a debate
are are then are we then supposed to
pick a winner is there a winner in these
debates I do want to innovate on the
format and actually a lot of
rationalists have been listing ideas
that I'm interested in of just like how
to make debates better I think picking a
winner is not critical because a lot of
the way you got to score a debate like
this is it depends on what the audience
thought coming in and like different
points can move different people a
little bit more so like voting on who
won I might try that but I might try
like other types of surveys um audience
engagement is interesting I might start
with low audience engagement and just
focus on making what I think is a high
quality debate like focusing on the
format of Me versus the debater versus
the moderator if there's a third
moderator or if I'm the moderator like
so like my high level answer is like I'm
very interested in playing with this
because I think that debates are like
very important for society especially
for complex topics especially for topics
that we have to hash out before the
world ends right I think debates are
very important and I want to do my part
in moving the art of debate forward so
more to come on that okay nice that's
awesome I mean just as a simple way to
Sor you could do one of those surveys on
that Spotify has now uh for every
podcast just have a an ARB type of type
of answer there anything else that uh
comes to mind that you want to mention
great no I'm good with that and I guess
uh just a meta observation my approach
to this podcast is I'm a big proponent
of The Lean Startup right where it's
just like sure this is a launch I've
never had a podcast before it's kind of
a big deal for me personally because I
love podcasts but like to the audience
it's not a big deal for you it shouldn't
be so and like I can always just go and
delete all the episodes and make a new
first episode so because of that I don't
want this to be like a perfect first
episode I just want to start dribbling
out more episodes I think you can expect
some random experiments from me like
maybe I'll do an episode that's only
seven minutes that's just one thought
that I have so stay tuned for that okay
cool well good luck with the podcast Lon
I'll be tuning in and uh hope it goes
well yeah thanks so much Orie just a
shout out to Orie Orie how can people
find you on
Twitter I mean they can follow me on
twiter my Twitter handle is yth co there
you go because you're into helping
companies grow through PR exactly sweet
and and also but he's Orie has gotten
into the art of going into the archives
and finding some very poignant clips of
people and then putting them on Twitter
and dunking and he's getting quite good
at that your critics might say you're
just out to dunk on Twitter what do you
say to those
people so I do enjoy a good Twitter dunk
just because it's like you know I try to
dunk fairly right like I try to dunk
being like hey here is an actual strong
argument why you're very wrong and
somebody in your position would be
expected to be more right but you're not
you're very wrong right like one of my
best dunks was like clipping Yan Leon on
Lex freedman's podcast a few years ago
saying something like how can an llm
ever understand basic physics like if I
put an object on the table I move the
table that's going to make the object
move an llm is not going to know that an
llm even GPT 5000 is never going to tell
you that moving the table moves the
object and then I smash cut to GPT 3.5
where you just ask it like hey I put an
object on the table I move the table
what happens in GPT 3.5 I was like oh
well yeah so the object on the table is
going to move there's going to be
friction like this long explanation of
like exactly what happens when you push
the table cue the moving the goalpost uh
moving the gopost meme GIF yeah exactly
right and it's just it's a quality dunk
because like it wasn't just like you
know being a dick right it wasn't an ad
hominum attack it's like look this is
your argument and it proved to be very
weak and the fact that you made a weak
argument and you didn't like publicly
retracted or anything right is very bad
because people look to you for guidance
right they look to you to tell them that
you know where things are going and you
know why the world's not going to end
and here you are making a really big
mistake about your own worldview that
that really raises questions and then I
package it up in like a tight little
dunk and and people enjoyed it on
Twitter you're just uh making a small
dent in the world with your
dunking yeah exactly right and it's like
you know I think in in my crypto days I
spent a lot a lot of time dunking on
crypto VCS on Twitter and I do actually
think that dunking is part of what got
through I mean I did get a bunch of
journalists coming to me and it it
became a mental reference for people
when they thought about like you know
a6z in crypto what do those guys know
and they would think to for example the
time that I clipped Mark andreon being
totally stumped dear in the headlights
when asked to say something intelligent
about the value prop of blockchain
Technology just being totally stumped
like that image for a lot of people who
are paying attention I think is is
seared into their mind so like yeah I
mean dunks could be a public service of
course there's a lot of dunking which I
don't agree with which is basically the
ad hominum attacks right so it's
becoming it's always been very popular
on Twitter and any discourse to make an
ad hominum attack and try to pass that
off like it's as good as as an actual
argument right as an object level
argument and I am big on trying to avoid
that I mean I wouldn't be Cod dead for
example like comparing somebody's
beliefs to their appearance which is
like a ridiculous thing like why would
any ever do that but of course you then
have Beth Jos who loves tweeting about
like how he's like working out and he's
going to like beat up scrawny guys while
this stupid stuff actually is popular
and I don't consider that a valid dunk
and you can even see me on Twitter
occasionally saying hey my bad I did the
stunk here's why I did it I I was wrong
to do it right so like one or two times
a year roughly is the frequency with
which I'll be like hey I didn't follow
my own rule book right like nobody's
perfect yeah yeah okay so you addressed
the Twitter dunking part but what about
the EA affiliation that totally
discredits you right you're just bought
off by Dustin moscovitz he's just uh
he's that's that's where it's coming
from wow that's that's some hard-hitting
journalism where you're coming on and
you got to confront me about my EA
affiliation the you you found you found
the underbelly of debates yep um so I
mean I never in my mind it was never
tarnished right like what actually
happened okay Sam bankman freed was a
criminal right and and the way I guess
the the logic people say is they're like
yeah he was was a criminal because he
was using utility theory he was a
utilitarian and every time that he would
scam people he had an effective altruism
cause which was the reason why he did it
okay but I have to stop you there
because like I don't actually know any
utilitarians who would actually tell you
like yes you always have to do this
naive calculation of how like stealing
from people can create more utility and
then go steal from them like I don't
personally know anybody like that I'm
sure there's some people like that
they're probably Psychopaths Sam bman
free there's a good chance he's a
psychopath whatever however you define
that but I don't see him as
representative of the EA movement
because if you just look look at do a
cluster analysis be like which a what do
a actually believe what do EAS actually
behave like they don't behave like naive
utilitarians they only behave like
people who notice that some things
happen to have really high utility like
some Charities like a famous example of
like play pumps International where they
would do uh pumps that were also
children's playgrounds and they were
like terrible water pumps right and like
when you donate to that charity I see
how you make yourself feel so good CU
you imagine children playing but that is
a terrible place to send your money
right and if you just send your money to
any other charity that's you can get a
10x increase in utility right so EA and
and like mosquito bed nets they're just
a really good bang for the buck right
like the concept of bang for the buck is
still very much intact right and I've
always been an effective altruist in the
simple sense that I think we can't lose
sight of these like huge huge gains from
making like from basic logical arguments
about what money actually helps people
survive
all right fair enough you know it's just
part of your part of your contrarian
view you see this as a good way of
helping I don't even think EA is cont I
actually think that EA is slowly going
to take over and just be like the
default view it's almost like you know
rationalism might have been like a niche
movement at one point or whatever you
want to call it but just like the idea
that like look when we debate things we
don't want to just like invoke God we
just want to use logic and arguments
whereas now that's like already faded
into the background there's not like a
fundamentalist sect that pops up and
it's like no you have to have this whole
debate in reference to God like we don't
even talk about it you know what I'm
saying like public debate doesn't
reference God like that whole side is
one and whatever name those people used
to go by they don't even have a name
anymore it's just everybody right I
listened to uh a podcast recently
talking about AI risk and it called uh
the people who were worried about AI
risk they called it a subculture a
couple people on Twitter have attacked
me being like you know Lon I know you're
arguing that Doom is logically true for
all these reasons but you know what
you're just being religious this is what
religiousness is when people say that
the world is going to end and therefore
we should like give up everything to
stop it from ending that's basically you
know end times just like the Bible says
so you can deny it but I know you're
just as religious as anybody Le on and
I'm like can can you just not call me
religious like is there a way to just
start from a place of no religion look
at fact form conclusions using basy and
reasoning the same as an AI built from
the ground up would do act on those
facts and just not be accused of being
religious like what do I have to do I'm
doing my best here to just completely
avoid religion you brought it up I
didn't bring it up like stop accusing me
of being religious I'm really
not all right there it is there you have
it not religious it's not a cultural
thing it's just the the
ideas just so we so we sweep out all the
accusations out of the way I just want
to say very clearly that I'm also not an
occult I'm not an ult either okay so um
I am an effective
I don't think there's anything wrong
with being an effective alism I uh I
don't I'm not related to Sam bankman
freed never talk to the guy don't think
that he's better than a psychopath or a
criminal um and yeah and I'm not an
occult so you can throw any accusation
at me and that'll probably not be
accurate yeah you live a relatively
simple life as far as I understand I me
you just you're on your computer you got
you know wife and kids and those are
right and I'm open to changing my mind
like it's it's very hard to to add homm
and if you can manage if somebody manag
to syn me with an ad homenum then that's
fine because there's many more like me
who you know you can't paint with the
same brush right you've got Jeff Hinton
fortunately recently came out to be
essentially an AI Doomer I mean he you
know he doesn't give necessarily a more
than 50% chance but he basically said
hey guys I'm really worried AI could
have disastrous consequences it's going
to be a master manipulator in society
we're currently not prepared we should
work on being prepared right like Jeff
Hinton is saying this stuff and good
luck character assassinating Jeff Hinton
and and if you manage to get him if you
catch Jeff Hinton in a sex scandal then
there's still like thousands more like
him right right true okay well um yeah
well you you've got some time to grow
this podcast and you know hopefully
it'll get big before you before the sex
scandal breaks
it yeah
exactly all right I'm going to use this
time wisely before I'm canceled okay all
right I got to go I got to go chat on
Ashley
Madison cool have fun
[Music]